



 
Advance Praise for The
Culture Map
“Erin Meyer provides us with a brilliant guide to what all
business leaders need to know right now: How to succeed
in managing across the diverse cultural contexts of today’s
workplace!”
—Marshall Goldsmith, author of the New York Times and
global bestseller What Got You Here Won’t Get You There
“Whether you are sitting at a desk in Boston or eating at a
restaurant in Beijing, communicating across cultures is the
great challenge of the global economy. Getting it right will
be the difference between success and failure. Erin Meyer
shows you how to get it right in this very important book.
Managers everywhere should read it.”
—Des Dearlove and Stuart Crainer, founders,
Thinkers50

“I highly recommend this book to both the professional and
leisure reader. Erin has shown herself to be one of the main
representativesof  the  next-generation  scholars  who
combine  deep  conceptual  models  with  very  practical
applications. A must-read!”
—Fons Trompenaars, author of Riding the Waves of
Culture
“Although we live in an increasingly digitally connected and
virtual business world, The Culture Map reminds us that
understanding  cultural  differences  in  human  interactions
still  matters.  Global  leaders  know  that  blending  cultural
and individual diversity in teams is a sure recipe for better
business  outcomes.  But  this  diversity  needs  to  be  first
understood and then proactively managed. Meyer presents
a  brave,  research-based  analysis  of  how  to  do  just  that.
With clear and practical frameworks, The Culture Map will
help business leaders become ‘cultural bridge builders’ to
the benefit of their teams and organizations.”
—Dr. Didier CL Bonnet, global head of practices,
Capgemini Consulting
“Commerce may be global but culture isn’t. Erin Meyer’s
The Culture Map reminds us that behind businesses there
are people who have biases, expectations, and a view of life
which can unexpectedly determine and form multimillion-
dollar decisions. Understanding that culture shapes people
who shape business is vital to win. This is the book you
need to travel with everywhere if you are serious about
going global.”
—Pedro Pina, head of brand solutions, Europe, Google
“The book abounds with well-chosen anecdotes to illustrate
the misunderstandings that can arise from clashing cultural

assumptions, making this enlightening book a pleasure to
read.”
—Foreign Affairs
“Whether you’re a corporate or traditional diplomat, global
traveler, government official, or passionate world citizen,
this is the one book you should not miss. Chock-full of real-
world  examples  and  a  simple  framework  that  can  be
utilized  in  any  cross-cultural  context,  Meyer’s  work  is
characterized by a fresh and relevant voice, distilling down
the essentials of communicating, persuading and working
effectively  around  the  globe.  It  is  rare  that  I  pick  up  a
cross-cultural book and can’t put it down.”
—Cari Guittard, Huffington Post
“This readable book explains how to dramatically increase
organisational  success  by  improving  our  ability  to
understand  the  behaviour  of  colleagues,  clients,  and
suppliers from different countries.”
—Professional Manager (UK)
“A  helpful  guide  to  working  effectively  with  people  from
othercultures.  .  .  .  Meyer  delivers  important  reading  for
those engaged in international business.”
—Kirkus Reviews
“With business becoming ever global, there are a raft of
books available on dealing with cultural differences. If you
only read one, make it INSEAD professor Erin Meyer’s. . . .
[She  s]killfully  blend[s]  real-life  examples  .  .  .  with  an
analytical framework. . . . What brings this book to life are
the numerous examples Meyerhas encountered, both in her
own  life  as  an  American  living  in  Paris,  and  in  her

experience running the Managing Virtual Teams module at
INSEAD.”
—HR Magazine, 5 star review
“Amusing.”
—Financial Times
“In a relaxed, entertaining, but always knowledgeable style,
Meyer draws on numerous examples from her experiences
to explain how to detect the invisible barriers in the global
business world—and how to get past them.”
—Siemens Industry Journal

THE CULTURE MAP



Copyright © 2014 by Erin Meyer.
International edition © 2015
Published in the United States by PublicAffairs™,
a Member of the Perseus Books Group All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without
written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical
articles and reviews. For information, address PublicAffairs, 250 West 57th
Street, 15th Floor, New York, NY 10107.
PublicAffairs books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the
U.S. by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more
information, please contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus
Books Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, call
(800) 810-4145, ext. 5000, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN 978-1-61039-671-4 (INTL EB)

First Edition
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

This book is dedicated to my sons, Ethan and Logan, who
show me daily what it means to grow up across cultures,
and to my husband, Eric, who made this all possible.

CONTENTS
Introduction: Navigating Cultural Differences and
the Wisdom of Mrs. Chen
1 Listening to the Air
Communicating Across Cultures
2 The Many Faces of Polite
Evaluating Performance and Providing Negative
Feedback
3 Why Versus How
The Art of Persuasion in a Multicultural World
4 How Much Respect Do You Want?
Leadership, Hierarchy, and Power
5 Big D or Little d
Who Decides, and How?
6 The Head or the Heart

Two Types of Trust and How They Grow
7 The Needle, Not the Knife
Disagreeing Productively
8 How Late Is Late?
Scheduling and Cross-Cultural Perceptions of Time
Epilogue: Putting the Culture Map to Work
Acknowledgments
Notes
Index
To  view  complete  culture  maps  for  many  countries  not
included in this book, and to compare one culture map to
another, please visit the tools page of www.erinmeyer.com.

INTRODUCTION
Navigating Cultural
Differences and the Wisdom of
Mrs. Chen
When dawn broke that chilly November morning in Paris, I
was driving to my office for a meeting with an important
new client. I hadn’t slept well, but that was nothing unusual,
since before an important training session I often have a
restless night. But what made this night different were the
dreams that disturbed my sleep.
I found myself shopping for groceries in a big American-
style supermarket. As I worked my way through my list—
fruit, Kleenex, more fruit, a loaf of bread, a container of
milk,  still  more  fruit—I  was  startled  to  discover  that  the
items  were  somehow  disappearing  from  my  cart  more
quickly than I could find them and stack them in the basket.
I  raced  down  the  aisle  of  the  store,  grabbing  goods  and
tossing them into my cart, only to see them vanish without a
trace. Horrified and frustrated, I realized that my shopping
would never be complete.

After having this dream repeatedly throughout the night,
I gave up trying to sleep. I got up, gulped a cup of coffee
and got dressed in the predawn dark, and wound my way
through  the  empty  Paris  streets  to  my  office  near  the
Champs  Elysées  to  prepare  for  that  day’s  program.
Reflecting that my nightmare of ineffectual shopping might
reflect  my  anxiety  about  being  completely  ready  for  my
clients, I poured my energy into arranging the conference
room and reviewing my notes for the day ahead. I would be
spending the day with one of the top executives at Peugeot
Citroën,  preparing  him  and  his  wife  for  the  cultural
adjustments they’d need to make in their upcoming move to
Wuhan,  China.  If  the  program  was  successful,  my  firm
would be hired to provide the same service for another fifty
couples later in the year, so there was a lot at stake.
Bo  Chen,  the  Chinese  country  expert  who  would  be
assisting with the training session, also arrived early. Chen,
a  thirty-six-year-old  Paris-based  journalist  from  Wuhan,
worked for a Chinese newspaper. He had volunteered to act
as a Chinese culture expert for the training, and his input
would be one of the most critical elements in making the
day a success. If he was as good as I hoped, the program
would be a hit and we would get to conduct the fifty follow-
up sessions. My confidence in Chen had been bolstered by
our preparatory meetings. Articulate, extroverted, and very
knowledgeable,  Chen  seemed  perfect  for  the  job.  I  had
asked  him  to  prepare  two  to  three  concrete  business
examples to illustrate each cultural dimension I would be
covering during the program, and he had enthusiastically
confirmed he would be ready.
Monsieur and Madame Bernard arrived, and I installed
them on one side of the big glass rectangular table with
Chen on the other side. Taking a deep, hopeful breath, I
began  the  session, outlining  on  a  flip  chart  the  cultural
issues that the Bernards needed to grasp so their time in
China  would  be  a  success.  As  the  morning  wore  on,  I
explained each dimension of the key issues, answered the

Bernards’ questions, and carefully kept an eye on Chen so I
could help facilitate his input.
But Chen didn’t seem to have any input. After finishing
the first dimension, I paused briefly and looked to him for
his input, but he didn’t speak up. He didn’t open his mouth,
move his body forward, or raise his hand. Apparently he had
no example to provide. Not wanting to embarrass Chen or to
create an awkward situation by calling on him when he was
not ready, I simply continued with my next point.
To my growing dismay, Chen remained silent and nearly
motionless as I went through the rest of my presentation.
He nodded politely while I was speaking, but that was all;
he used no other body language to indicate any reactions,
positive or negative. I gave every example I could think of
and  engaged  in  dialogue  with  the  client  as  best  I  could.
Dimension after dimension, I spoke, shared, and consulted
with  the  Bernards—and  dimension  after  dimension,  there
was no input from Chen.
I  continued  for  three  full  hours.  My  initial
disappointment with Chen was spilling over into full-fledged
panic.  I  needed  his  input  for  the  program  to  succeed.
Finally,  although  I  didn’t  want  to  create  an  awkward
moment in front of the client, I decided to take a chance.
“Bo,” I asked, “did you have any examples you would like to
share?”
Chen sat up straight in his chair, smiled confidently at
the clients, and opened up his notebook, which was filled
with pages and pages of typed notes. “Thank you, Erin,” he
replied. “I do.” And then, to my utter relief, Chen began to
explain  one  clear,  pertinent,  fascinating  example  after
another.
In reflecting on the story of my awkward engagement
with  “Silent  Bo,”  it’s  natural  to  assume  that  something
about Chen’s personality, my personality, or the interaction
between  us  might  have  led  to  the  strained  situation.
Perhaps  Chen  was  mute  because  he  is  not  a  very  good
communicator,  or  because  he  is  shy  or  introverted  and

doesn’t feel comfortable expressing himself until pushed. Or
perhaps  I  am  an  incompetent  facilitator,  telling  Chen  to
prepare for the meeting and then failing to call on him until
the session was almost over. Or maybe, more charitably, I
was just so tired from dreaming about lost fruit all night
long  that  I  missed  the  visual  cues  Chen  was  sending  to
indicate that he had something to say.
In  fact,  my  previous  meetings  with  Chen  had  made  it
clear to me that he was neither inarticulate nor shy; he was
actually  a  gifted  communicator  and  also  bursting  with
extroversion  and  self-confidence.  What’s  more,  I’d  been
conducting client meetings for years and had never before
experienced  a  disconnect  quite  like  this  one,  which
suggested that my skills as a facilitator were not the source
of the problem.
The  truth  is  that  the  story  of  Silent  Bo  is  a  story  of
culture, not personality. But the cultural explanation is not
as  simple  as  you  might  think.  Chen’s  behavior  in  our
meeting  lines  up  with  a  familiar  cultural  stereotype.
Westerners often assume that Asians, in general, are quiet,
reserved, or shy. If you manage a global team that includes
both Asians and Westerners, it is very likely that you will
have heard the common Western complaint that the Asian
participants don’t speak very much and are less forthright
about offering their individual opinions in team meetings.
Yet the cultural stereotype does not reflect the actual reason
behind Chen’s behavior.
Since the Bernards, Chen, and I were participating in a
cross-cultural training program (which I was supposed to be
leading—though I now found myself, uncomfortably, in the
role  of  a  student),  I  decided  to  simply  ask  Chen  for  an
explanation of his actions. “Bo,” I exclaimed, “you had all of
these great examples! Why didn’t you jump in and share
them with us earlier?”
“Were you expecting me to jump in?” he asked, a look of
genuine surprise on his face. He went on to describe the
situation as he saw it. “In this room,” he said, turning to M.

and Mme. Bernard, “Erin is the chairman of the meeting.”
He continued:
As she is the senior person in the room, I wait for her
to call on me. And, while I am waiting, I should show I
am a good listener by keeping both my voice and my
body quiet. In China, we often feel Westerners speak
up so much in meetings that they do this to show off,
or they are poor listeners. Also, I have noticed that
Chinese people leave a few more seconds of silence
before jumping in than in the West. You Westerners
practically speak on top of each other in a meeting. I
kept waiting for Erin to be quiet long enough for me
to jump in, but my turn never came. We Chinese often
feel  Americans  are  not  good  listeners  because  they
are always jumping in on top of one another to make
their points. I would have liked to make one of my
points if an appropriate length of pause had arisen.
But  Erin  was  always  talking,  so  I  just  kept  waiting
patiently. My mother left it deeply engrained in me:
You have two eyes, two ears, but only one mouth. You
should use them accordingly.
As  Chen  spoke,  the  cultural  underpinnings  of  our
misunderstanding  became  vividly  clear  to  the  Bernards—
and to me. It was obvious that they go far beyond any facile
stereotypes  about  “the  shy  Chinese.”  And  this  new
understanding  led  to  the  most  important  question  of  all:
Once  I  am  aware  of  the  cultural  context  that shapes  a
situation,  what  steps  can  I  take  to  be  more  effective  in
dealing with it?
In the Silent Bo scenario, my deeper awareness of the
meaning of Bo’s behavior leads to some easy, yet powerful,
solutions. In the future, I can be more prepared to recognize
and  flexibly  address  the  differing  cultural  expectations
around status and communication. The next time I lead a
training program with a Chinese cultural specialist, I must

make sure to invite him to speak. And if he doesn’t respond
immediately, I need to allow a few more seconds of silence
before speaking myself. Chen, too, can adapt some simple
strategies  to  improve  his  effectiveness.  He  might  simply
choose  to  override  his  natural  tendency  to  wait  for  an
invitation to speak by forcing himself to jump in whenever
he has an idea to contribute. If this feels too aggressive, he
might raise his hand to request the floor when he can’t find
the space he needs to talk.
In  this  book,  I  provide  a  systematic,  step-by-step
approach  to  understanding  the  most  common  business
communication  challenges  that  arise  from  cultural
differences,  and  offer  steps  for  dealing  with  them  more
effectively. The process begins with recognizing the cultural
factors  that  shape  human  behavior  and  methodically
analyzing the reasons for that behavior. This, in turn, will
allow  you  to  apply  clear  strategies  to  improve  your
effectiveness at solving the most thorny problems caused by
cross-cultural  misunderstandings—or  to  avoid  them
altogether.
* * *
When I walked into Sabine Dulac’s second-floor office at La
Defense, the business district just outside of Paris, she was
pacing excitedly in front of her window, which overlooked a
small footbridge and a concrete sculpture depicting a giant
human  thumb.  A  highly  energetic  finance  director  for  a
leading global energy company, Dulac had been offered a
two-year assignment in Chicago, after years of petitioning
her superiors for such an opportunity. Now she’d spent the
previous evening poring over a sheaf of articles I’d sent her
describing  the  differences  between  French  and  American
business cultures.
“I think this move to Chicago is going to be perfect for
me,” Dulac declared. “I love working with Americans. Ils
sont tellement pratiques et efficaces! I love that focus on

practicality and efficiency. Et transparent! Americans are so
much more explicit and transparent than we are in France!”
I spent several hours with Dulac helping her prepare for
the move, including exploring how she might best adapt her
leadership style to be effective in the context of American
culture.  This  would  be  her  first  experience  living  outside
France,  and  she  would  be  the  only  non-American  on  her
team,  twin  circumstances  that  only  increased  her
enthusiasm for the move. Thrilled with this new opportunity,
Dulac  departed  for  the  Windy  City.  The  two  of  us  didn’t
speak for four months. Then I called both her new American
boss and later Dulac herself for our prescheduled follow-up
conversations.
Jake Webber responded with a heavy sigh when I asked
how Dulac was performing. “She is doing—sort of medium.
Her team really likes her, and she’s incredibly energetic. I
have to admit that her energy has ignited her department.
That’s  been  positive.  She  has  definitely  integrated  much
more  quickly  than  I  expected.  Really,  that  has  been
excellent.”
I could sense that Webber’s evaluation was about to take
a turn for the worse. “However, there are several critical
things that I need Sabine to change about the way she is
working,”  Webber  continued,  “and  I  just  don’t  see  her
making an effort to do so. Her spreadsheets are sloppy, she
makes  calculation  errors,  and  she comes  to  meetings
unprepared. I have spoken to her a handful of times about
these things, but she is not getting the message. She just
continues with her same work patterns. I spoke to her last
Thursday about this again, but there’s still no visible effort
on her part.”
“We had her performance review this morning,” Webber
said with another sigh, “and I detailed these issues again.
We’ll wait and see. But if she doesn’t get in gear with these
things, I don’t think this job is going to work out.”
Feeling concerned, I called Dulac.

“Things are going great!” Dulac proclaimed. “My team is
terrific. I’ve really been able to connect with them. And I
have a great relationship with my boss. Je m’épanouis!” she
added,  a  French  phrase  that  translates  loosely  as  “I’m
blossoming” or “I’m thriving.” She went on, “For the first
time in my career I’ve found a job that is just perfect for me.
That takes advantage of all of my talents and skills. Oh, and
I have to tell you—I had my first performance review this
morning. I’m just delighted! It was the best performance
review I have had since starting with this company. I often
think I will try to extend my stay beyond these two years,
things are going so well.”
As we did with the story of Silent Bo, let’s consider for a
moment  whether  the  miscommunication  between  Webber
and Dulac is more likely a result of personality misfit or
cultural differences. In this case, national stereotypes may
be  more  confusing  than  helpful.  After  all,  the  common
assumption about the French is that they are masters of
implicit and indirect communication, speaking and listening
with subtlety and sensitivity, while Americans are thought of
as prone to explicit and direct communication—the blunter
the better. Yet in the story of “Deaf Dulac,” an American
supervisor complains that his French subordinate lacks the
sophistication  to  grasp his  meaning,  while  the  French
manager seems happily oblivious to the message her boss is
trying to convey. Faced with this seemingly counterintuitive
situation, you might assume that Webber and Dulac simply
have incompatible personalities, regardless of their cultural
backgrounds.
So you might assume. But suppose you happened to be
speaking with twenty or thirty French managers living in
the  United  States,  and  you  heard  similar  stories  from  a
dozen of them. As they explained, one by one, how their
American bosses gave them negative feedback in a way they
found confusing, ambiguous, or downright misleading, you
might  come  to  the  correct  conclusion  that  there  is
something cultural driving this pattern of misunderstanding.

And  in  fact,  such  a  pattern  does  exist—which  strongly
suggests that the case of Deaf Dulac is much more than a
matter of personality conflict.
This pattern is puzzling because Americans often do tend
to be more explicit and direct than the French (or, more
precisely, more “low-context,” a term we’ll explore further
in  a  later  chapter).  The  one  big  exception  arises  when
managers are providing feedback to their subordinates. In a
French setting, positive feedback is often given implicitly,
while  negative  feedback  is  given  more  directly.  In  the
United  States,  it’s  just  the  opposite.  American  managers
usually give positive feedback directly while trying to couch
negative messages in positive, encouraging language. Thus,
when  Webber  reviewed  Dulac’s  work  using  the  popular
American  method  of  three  positives  for  every  negative,
Dulac left the meeting with his praise ringing delightfully in
her ears, while the negative feedback sounded very minor
indeed.
If Dulac had been aware of this cultural tendency when
discussing  her  job  performance  with  her  new  American
boss,  she  might  have  weighed  the  negative  part  of  the
review more heavily than she would if receiving it from a
French boss, thereby reading the feedback more accurately
and potentially saving her job.
Armed with the same understanding, Webber could have
reframed his communication for Dulac. He might have said,
“When I give a performance review, I always start by going
through three or four things I feel the person is doing well.
Then I move on to the really important part of the meeting,
which is, of course, what you can do to improve. I hate to
jump into the important part of the meeting without starting
with the positives. Is that method okay for you?”
Simply explaining what you are doing can often help a
lot, both by defusing an immediate misunderstanding and by
laying the foundation for better teamwork in the future—a
principle we also saw at work when Bo Chen described his
reasons for remaining silent during most of our meeting.

This is one of the dozens of concrete, practical strategies
we’ll  provide  for  handling  cross-cultural  missteps  and
improving your effectiveness in working with global teams.
INVISIBLE BOUNDARIES THAT DIVIDE OUR
WORLD
Situations like the two we’ve just considered are far more
common than you might suspect. The sad truth is that the
vast  majority  of  managers  who  conduct  business
internationally have little understanding about how culture
is impacting their work. This is especially true as more and
more  of  us  communicate  daily  with  people  in  other
countries over virtual media like e-mail or telephone. When
you live, work, or travel extensively in a foreign country, you
pick up a lot of contextual cues that help you understand
the culture of the people living there, and that helps you to
better decode  communication  and  adapt  accordingly.  By
contrast, when you exchange e-mails with an international
counterpart  in  a  country  you  haven’t  spent  time  in,  it  is
much easier to miss the cultural subtleties impacting the
communication.
A simple example is a characteristic behavior unique to
India—a half-shake, half-nod of the head. Travel to India on
business and you’ll soon learn that the half-shake, half-nod
is not a sign of disagreement, uncertainty, or lack of support
as it would be in most other cultures. Instead it suggests
interest,  enthusiasm,  or  sometimes  respectful  listening.
After a day or two, you notice that everyone is doing it, you
make a mental note of its apparent meaning, and you are
able  henceforth  to  accurately  read  the  gesture  when
negotiating a deal with your Indian outsourcing team.
But over e-mail or telephone, you may interact daily with
your  Indian  counterparts  from  your  office  in  Hellerup,
Denmark,  or  Bogota,  Colombia,  without  ever  seeing  the
environment  they  live  and  work  in.  So  when  you  are  on
videoconference with one of your top Indian managers, you

may interpret his half-shake, half-nod as meaning that he is
not  in  full  agreement  with  your  idea.  You  redouble  your
efforts to convince him, but the more you talk the more he
(seemingly) indicates with his head that he is not on board.
You get off the call puzzled, frustrated, and perhaps angry.
Culture  has  impacted  your  communication,  yet  in  the
absence  of  the  visual  and  contextual  cues  that  physical
presence  provides,  you  didn’t  even  recognize  that
something cultural was going on.
So whether we are aware of it or not, subtle differences
in  communication  patterns  and  the  complex  variations  in
what is considered good business or common sense from
one country to another have a tremendous impact on how
we understand one another, and ultimately on how we get
the job done. Many of these cultural differences—varying
attitudes concerning when best to speak or stay quiet, the
role of the leader in the room, and what kind of negative
feedback is the most constructive—may seem small. But if
you  are  unaware  of  the  differences  and  unarmed  with
strategies  for  managing  them  effectively,  they  can  derail
your team meetings, demotivate your employees, frustrate
your foreign suppliers, and in dozens of other ways make it
much more difficult to achieve your goals.
Today, whether we work in Düsseldorf or Dubai, Brasília
or Beijing, New York or New Delhi, we are all part of a
global network (real or virtual, physical or electronic) where
success requires navigating through wildly different cultural
realities. Unless we know how to decode other cultures and
avoid  easy-to-fall-into  cultural  traps,  we  are  easy  prey  to
misunderstanding, needless conflict, and ultimate failure.
BEING OPEN TO INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IS
NOT ENOUGH
It is quite possible, even common, to work across cultures
for  decades  and  travel  frequently  for  business  while
remaining  unaware  and  uninformed  about  how  culture

impacts you. Millions of people work in global settings while
viewing everything from their own cultural perspectives and
assuming   that   all   differences,   controversy,   and
misunderstanding are rooted in personality. This is not due
to  laziness.  Many  well-intentioned  people  don’t  educate
themselves about cultural differences because they believe
that  if  they  focus  on  individual  differences,  that  will  be
enough.
After  I  published  an  online  article  on  the  differences
among  Asian  cultures  and  their  impact  on  cross-Asia
teamwork,  one reader  commented,  “Speaking  of  cultural
differences  leads  us  to  stereotype  and  therefore  put
individuals in boxes with ‘general traits.’ Instead of talking
about culture, it is important to judge people as individuals,
not just products of their environment.”
At first, this argument sounds valid, even enlightened. Of
course  individuals,  no  matter  their  cultural  origins,  have
varied  personality  traits.  So  why  not  just  approach  all
people with an interest in getting to know them personally,
and proceed from there? Unfortunately, this point of view
has kept thousands of people from learning what they need
to  know  to  meet  their  objectives.  If  you  go  into  every
interaction  assuming  that  culture  doesn’t  matter,  your
default mechanism will be to view others through your own
cultural  lens  and  to  judge  or  misjudge  them  accordingly.
Ignore  culture,  and  you  can’t  help  but  conclude,  “Chen
doesn’t  speak  up—obviously  he  doesn’t  have  anything  to
say!  His  lack  of  preparation  is  ruining  this  training
program!” Or perhaps, “Jake told me everything was great
in  our  performance  review,  when  really  he  was  unhappy
with my work—he is a sneaky, dishonest, incompetent boss!”
Yes, every individual is different. And yes, when you work
with  people  from  other  cultures,  you  shouldn’t  make
assumptions  about  individual  traits  based  on  where  a
person comes from. But this doesn’t mean learning about
cultural contexts is unnecessary. If your business success
relies on your ability to work successfully with people from

around  the  world,  you  need  to  have  an  appreciation  for
cultural  differences  as  well  as  respect  for  individual
differences. Both are essential.
As  if  this  complexity  weren’t  enough,  cultural  and
individual differences are often wrapped up with differences
among  organizations,  industries,  professions,  and  other
groups.  But  even  in  the  most  complex  situations,
understanding how cultural differences affect the mix may
help  you  discover  a  new  approach.  Cultural  patterns  of
behavior and belief frequently impact our perceptions (what
we see), cognitions (what we think), and actions (what we
do). The goal of this book is to help you improve your ability
to decode these three facets of culture and to enhance your
effectiveness in dealing with them.
EIGHT SCALES THAT MAP THE WORLD’S
CULTURES
I was not born into a multicultural family to parents who
took  me  around  the  world.  On  the  contrary,  I  was  born
outside  of  Two  Harbors,  Minnesota,  most  famous  among
drivers on the road leaving Duluth as the home of Betty’s
Pies. It’s the kind of small town where most people spend
their  entire  lives  in  the  culture  of  their  childhood.  My
parents were a bit more venturesome; when I was four, they
moved the family all of two hundred miles to Minneapolis,
where I grew up.
But as an adult I fell deeply in love with the thrill of being
surrounded  by  people  who  see  the  world  in  dramatically
different ways from me. Having now lived nearly half of my
life  outside  of  the  United  States,  I’ve  developed  skills
ranging  from  learning  to  eat  mopane  worms  for  an
afternoon  snack  while  teaching  English  to  high  school
students in Botswana, to dodging cows, chickens, and three-
wheeled rickshaws during my morning run while on a short-
term executive teaching stint in India.

Today, married to a Frenchman and raising two children
in France, I have to struggle with cross-cultural challenges
daily. Is it really necessary for an educated person to fold
lettuce  leaves  before  eating  them,  or  would  cutting  the
lettuce  also  be  acceptable?  If  my  very  kind  upstairs
neighbors kissed me on the cheeks when I passed them in
the hall yesterday, would it be overkill for me to kiss them
on the cheek the first time I pass them every single day?
However,  the  lessons  in  this  book  emerged  not  from
discussions  about  lettuce  leaves  or  mopane  worms
(interesting  as  these  may  be),  but  from  the  fascinating
opportunity to teach cross-cultural management in one of
the  most  culturally  diverse  institutions  on  earth.  After
opening  the  French  branch  of  a  cross-cultural  consulting
firm, where I had the pleasure of learning from dozens of
culture specialists like Bo Chen on a daily basis, I began
working as a professor at INSEAD, an international business
school largely unknown in Two Harbors, Minnesota.
INSEAD is one of the rare places where everyone is a
cultural minority. Although the home campus is located in
France, only around 7 percent of the students are French.
The  last  time  I  checked,  the  largest  cultural  group  was
Indian,  at  about  11  percent  of  the  overall  student  body.
Other executive students have lived and worked all over the
world, and many have spent their careers moving from one
region  to  another.  When  it  comes  to  cross-cultural
management, these global executives are some of the most
sophisticated  and  knowledgeable  on  the  planet.  And
although they come to INSEAD to learn from us, every day I
am secretly learning from them. I’ve been able to turn my
classroom  into  a  laboratory  where  the  executive
participants  test,  challenge,  validate,  and  correct  the
findings from more than a decade of research. Many have
shared  their  own  wisdom  and  their  tested  solutions  for
getting things done in a global world.
This rich trove of information and experience informs the
eight-scale model that is at the heart of this book. Each of

the  eight  scales  represents  one  key  area  that  managers
must  be  aware  of,  showing  how  cultures  vary  along  a
spectrum from one extreme to its opposite. The eight scales
are:
• Communicating: low-context vs. high-context
• Evaluating: direct negative feedback vs. indirect
negative feedback
• Persuading: principles-first vs. applications-first
• Leading: egalitarian vs. hierarchical
• Deciding: consensual vs. top-down
• Trusting: task-based vs. relationship-based
• Disagreeing: confrontational vs. avoids
confrontation
• Scheduling: linear-time vs. flexible-time
Whether you need to motivate employees, delight clients,
or simply organize a conference call among members of a
cross-cultural team, these eight scales will help you improve
your  effectiveness.  By  analyzing  the  positioning  of  one
culture  relative  to  another,  the  scales  will  enable  you  to
decode  how  culture  influences  your  own  international
collaboration  and  avoid  painful  situations  like  the  one  in
which Webber and Dulac found themselves caught.
PUTTING THE CULTURE MAP TO WORK
Let  me  give  you  an  example  of  how  understanding  the
scales might play out in a real situation. Imagine that you
are an Israeli executive working for a company that has just
purchased  a  manufacturing  plant  in  Russia.  Your  new
position  requires  you  to  manage  a  group  of  Russian
employees. At first, things go well, but then you start to
notice that you are having more difficulty than you did with
your own Israeli staff. You are not getting the same results
from your team, and your management style does not seem
to have the positive impact it did at home.

Puzzled and concerned, you decide to take a look at the
position of Russian business culture on the eight scales and
compare it with Israeli culture. The result is the culture map
shown in Figure I.1—the kind of tool we’ll explore in detail
in the chapters to come.

FIGURE I.1.
As you review the culture map, you notice that Russian
and Israeli business cultures both value flexible scheduling
rather than organized scheduling (scale 8), both accept and
appreciate open disagreement (scale 7), and both approach
issues of trust through a relationship orientation rather than
a  task  orientation  (scale  6).  This  resonates  with  your
experience.  However,  you  notice  that  there’s  a  big  gap
between the two cultures when it comes to leading (scale 4),
with Russia favoring a hierarchical approach, while Israel

prefers an egalitarian one. As we’ll discuss in more detail
later,  this  suggests  that  the  appreciation  for  flat
organizational structures and egalitarian management style
so  characteristic  of  Israeli  businesspeople  may  be
ineffective in Russia’s strongly hierarchical environment.
Here is a clue to the difficulties you’ve been having. You
begin  to  reconsider  the  common  Israeli  attitude  that  the
boss is “just one of the guys.” You realize that some of your
words and actions, tailored to the egalitarian Israeli culture,
may have been misunderstood by your Russian team and
may even have been demotivating to them. In the weeks
that  follow,  as  you  begin  to  make  adjustments  to  your
leadership  style,  you  find  that  the  atmosphere  slowly
improves—and  so  do  the  bottom-line  results.  This  is  an
example  of  how  we  use  the  eight  scales  and  the  culture
mapping process to effect genuine, powerful changes within
organizations, to the benefit of everyone involved.
HOW DID MY COUNTRY GET PLACED THERE?
Each of the following chapters is devoted to one of the eight
culture  map  scales.  Each  scale  positions  twenty  to  thirty
countries along a continuum and guides you in applying the
scale to dozens of situations commonly arising in our global
business world. Because what is important on the scale is
the relative gap between two countries, someone from any
country on the map can apply the book’s concepts to their
interactions with colleagues from any other country.
Some may object that these scales don’t give adequate
weight to cultural variations among individuals, subcultures,
regions, and organizations. Understanding how the scales
were  created  may  help  you  see  how  such  variations  are
reflected  in  the  scales,  as  well  as  how  you  can  most
accurately apply the insights that the scales provide.
As an example, let’s look at the placement of Germany on
the Scheduling scale, which reflects how people in various
cultures tend to manage time. The first step is interviewing

mid-level  German  managers,  asking  them  to  speak  about
the importance of being flexible versus organized when it
comes  to  scheduling  meetings,  projects,  or  timelines.  Of
course, individual responses vary, but a normative pattern
emerges.  A  bell  curve  illustrates  the  range  of  what  is
considered  appropriate  and  acceptable  business  behavior
on the scheduling scale in Germany, with a hump where the
majority of responses fall. It might look like this:

FIGURE I.2.
Of course, there are probably a few outliers—a handful of
Germans who fall to the right or the left of the hump—but
their  behavior,  judging  by  the  average  German’s  opinion,
would  be  considered  inappropriate,  unacceptable,  or  at
least not ideal in German business culture.
It was through this type of analysis that I began to map
the  country  positions  on  each  scale.  I  later  adjusted  the
positions based on feedback from hundreds of international
executives.
When you look at the scales depicted in this book, you
won’t see the hump for each country, but simply a point
representing the normative position of the hump, as shown
in Figure I.3. In other words, the country position on the
scale indicates the mid-position of a range of acceptable or
appropriate behaviors in that country.

FIGURE I.3.
When  you  look  at  the  scales,  keep  in  mind  that  both
cultural differences and individual differences impact each
international  interaction.  Within  the  range  of  acceptable
business  behaviors  in  a  given  culture,  an  individual
businessperson will make choices in particular situations.
For example, consider the Evaluating scale (see Chapter
2),  which  deals  with  whether  it  is  better  to  be  direct  or
indirect when giving negative feedback. There is a range of
acceptable  ways  to  give  negative  feedback  in  the
Netherlands, and a Dutch businessperson can comfortably
make  a  choice  that  falls  anywhere  within  that  range.
Similarly,  there  is  a  range  of  appropriate  ways  to  give
negative  feedback  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and  a  British
businessperson  can  choose  a  specific  approach  from  any
place within that range (see Figure I.4). The culture sets a
range,  and  within  that  range  each  individual  makes  a
choice. It is not a question of culture or personality, but of
culture and personality.
If you compare two cultures, you may find that portions
of  their  ranges  overlap,  while  other  portions  do  not.  So
some Dutch people might employ feedback styles that are
appropriate  in  the  Netherlands  as  well  as  in  the  United
Kingdom,  while  others  may  use  techniques  that  seem
acceptable  in  the  Netherlands  but  would be  considered
inappropriate, blunt, and offensive in the United Kingdom.
The eight scales can help you understand such differences

and  evaluate  individual  choices  within  a  broad  cultural
context.

FIGURE I.4.
THE CRUCIAL PERSPECTIVE: CULTURAL
RELATIVITY
Another crucial factor in understanding the meaning of the
eight  scales  is  the  concept  of  cultural  relativity.  For  an
example, let’s consider the location of Spain on the Trusting
scale  (Figure  I.5),  which  positions  cultures  according  to
whether  they  build  trust  based  on  relationships  or  on
experience of shared tasks.

FIGURE I.5.
Now ask yourself a simple question. Is Spain task-based
or  relationship-based?  If  you  are  like  most  people,  you
would  answer  that  Spain  is  relationship-based.  But  this
answer is subtly, yet crucially, wrong. The correct answer is
that,  if  you  come  from  France,  the  United  Kingdom,
Sweden, the United States, or any other culture that falls to
the left of Spain on the scale, then Spain is relationship-
based in comparison to your own culture. However, if you
come from India, Saudi Arabia, Angola, or China, then Spain
is very task-based indeed—again, in comparison to your own
culture.
The point here is that, when examining how people from
different cultures relate to one another, what matters is not
the  absolute  position  of  either  culture  on  the  scale  but
rather the relative position of the two cultures. It is this
relative positioning that determines how people view one
another.
For example, consider what happened when the British
consulting  group  KPMG  created  several  global  teams  to
standardize  the  implementation  of  management  software
systems  developed  by  enterprise  software  developer  SAP.
One  global  team  was  composed  primarily  of  British  and
French consultants, and throughout their work the British
complained that the French were disorganized, chaotic, and
lacked punctuality. “They take so many tangents and side
routes during the meeting, it’s impossible to follow their line
of thinking!” one British team member said.

On another team, made up of mainly Indians and French,
the  Indians  complained  that  the  French  were  rigid,
inflexible, and obsessed with deadlines and structure to the
point that they were unable to adapt as the situation around
them  changed.  “If  you  don’t  tell  them  weeks  in  advance
what is going to happen in the meeting, in which order, it
makes them very nervous,” one Indian team member said.
Why such contradictory perceptions of the French team
members? A quick glance at the Scheduling scale (Figure
I.6) shows that the French fall between the British and the
Indians,  leading  to  opposite  perceptions  from  those  two
outlying perspectives.
When I described this experience to a group of Germans
and British collaborating on another global team, one of the
Germans laughed. “That’s very funny,” he told us. “Because
we  Germans  always  complain  that  the  British  are
disorganized,  chaotic,  and  always  late—exactly  the
complaint the British in your example lodged against the
French.”  Note  the  relative  positions  of  the  Germans  and
British on the Scheduling scale.

FIGURE I.6.
So  cultural  relativity  is  the  key  to  understanding  the
impact  of  culture  on  human  interactions.  If  an  executive
wants  to  build  and  manage  global  teams  that  can  work
together successfully, he needs to understand not just how
people from his own culture experience people from various
international  cultures,  but  also  how  those  international
cultures perceive one another.
WHEN CULTURAL DIFFERENCES ARE INSIDE
US
I  recently  had  occasion  to  place  a  phone  call  to  Cosimo
Turroturro,  who  runs  a  speakers’  association  based  in
London. Simply on the basis of his name, I assumed before
the  call  that  he  was  Italian.  But  as  soon  as  he  spoke,
starting sentences with the German “ja,” it was clear that he
was not.
Turroturro  explained,  “My  mother  was  Serbian,  my
father was Italian, I was raised largely in Germany, although
I have spent most of my adult life in the U.K. So you see,
these cultural differences that you talk about, I don’t need
to speak to anyone else in order to experience them. I have
all of these challenges right inside myself!”
I laughed, imagining Turroturro having breakfast alone
and saying to himself in Italian, “Why do you have to be so
blunt?” and responding to himself in German, “Me, blunt?!
Why do you have to be so emotional?”

While  most  people  spend  most  of  their  lives  in  their
native lands, the scales in this book have an extra level of
interest for those with more heterogeneous backgrounds. If
you’ve lived in two or more countries or have parents from
different countries, you may begin to notice how multiple
cultures have helped to shape your personality. You may find
that  part  of  your  personal  style  comes  from  the  culture
where you spent the first years of your life, another from the
culture where you attended college and held your first job,
another from your father’s culture, and still another from
your  mother’s  culture.  The  following  pages  may  not  only
help you become more effective as a businessperson; they
may even help you understand yourself more fully than ever
before.
TASTING THE WATER YOU SWIM IN
Culture can be a sensitive topic. Speaking about a person’s
culture  often  provokes  the  same  type  of  reaction  as
speaking  about  his  mother.  Most  of  us  have  a  deep
protective instinct for the culture we consider our own, and,
though  we  may  criticize  it  bitterly  ourselves,  we  may
become easily incensed if someone from outside the culture
dares to do so. For this reason, I’m walking a minefield in
this book.
I promise that all the situations I recount are drawn from
the stories of real people working in real companies, though
I’ve changed names, details, and circumstances to maintain
anonymity.  Nonetheless,  you  may  find  yourself  reacting
defensively when you hear what others have said about the
culture you call your own: “It isn’t true! My culture is not a
bit like that!”
At the risk of pouring oil on the fire, allow me to repeat
the familiar story of the two young fish who encounter an
older fish swimming the opposite way. He nods at them and
says,  “Morning,  boys,  how’s  the  water?”—which  prompts

one of the young fish to ask the other, “What the hell is
water?”
1
When you are in and of a culture—as fish are in and of
water—it  is  often  difficult  or  even  impossible  to see  that
culture. Often people who have spent their lives living in
one culture see only regional and individual differences and
therefore conclude, “My national culture does not have a
clear character.”
John  Cleary,  an  engineer  from  the  United  States,
explained this phenomenon during one of my courses for
executives.
The first twenty-eight years of my life I lived in the
smallish town of Madison, Wisconsin, but in my work I
traveled  across  the  U.S.  weekly,  since  my  team
members  were  scattered  across  the  country.  The
regional differences in the U.S. are strong. New York
City feels entirely different than Athens, Georgia. So
when I began working with foreigners who spoke of
what it was like to work with “Americans,” I saw that
as a sign of ignorance. I would respond, “There is no
American culture. The regions are different and within
the regions every individual is different.”
But  then  I  moved  to  New  Delhi,  India.  I  began
leading  an  Indian  team  and  overseeing  their
collaboration with my former team in the U.S. I was
very excited, thinking this would be an opportunity to
learn  about  the  Indian  culture.  After  16  months  in
New  Delhi  working  with  Indians  and  seeing  this
collaboration from the Indian viewpoint, I can report
that I have learned a tremendous amount . . . about
my  own  culture.  As  I  view  the  American  way  of
thinking  and  working  and  acting  from  this  outside
perspective,  for  the  first  time  I  see  a  clear,  visible
American  culture.  The  culture  of  my  country  has  a
strong character that was totally invisible to me when
I was in it and part of it.

When you hear the people quoted in this book complain,
criticize, or gasp at your culture from their perspective, try
not to take it as a personal affront. Instead, think of it as an
opportunity  to  learn  more  not  just  about  the  unfamiliar
cultures of this world but also about your own. Try seeing,
feeling, and tasting the water you swim in the way a land
animal  might  perceive  it.  You  may  find  the  experience
fascinating—and mind-expanding.
* * *
When  I  arrived  back  in  my  apartment  in  Paris  after  the
session with the Bernards and Bo Chen, I thought back to
the  advice  from  Bo’s  mother.  I  Googled  her  words,  “you
have two eyes, two ears, and one mouth and you should use
them  accordingly,”  expecting  the  quotation  to  begin  with
“Confucius says” or at least “Bo Chen’s mother says.” No
such luck. The ancient Greek philosopher Epictetus seems
to have said something similar, but as far as I know he never
lived in China.
That night, instead of dreaming about fruit disappearing
from my shopping cart, I lay in bed thinking about why Bo
Chen didn’t speak up and why I kept speaking in the face of
his silence, while—irony of ironies—I was running a session
on cross-cultural effectiveness. I thought again about Mrs.
Chen’s advice and wished that I had followed her suggestion
that morning.
Mrs.  Chen’s  advice  is  sound,  not  just  for  Chinese
children,  but  also  for  all  of  us  who  hope  to  improve  our
effectiveness  working across  cultural  barriers.  When
interacting with someone from another culture, try to watch
more, listen more, and speak less. Listen before you speak
and learn before you act. Before picking up the phone to
negotiate  with  your  suppliers  in  China,  your  outsourcing
team in India, your new boss in Brazil, or your clients in
Russia, use all the available resources to understand how
the  cultural  framework  you  are  working  with  is  different
from your own—and only then react.

1
Listening to the Air
Communicating Across Cultures
When I arrived at my hotel in New Delhi, I was hot and,
more important, hungry. Although I would spend that week
conducting classes for a group of Indian executives at the
swank  five-star  Oberoi  hotel,  the  Indian  business  school
hosting me put me up in a more modest and much smaller
residence  several  miles  away.  Though  quiet  and  clean,  it
looked like a big concrete box with windows, set back from
the road and surrounded by a wall with a locked gate. This
will be fine, I thought as I dropped my bag off in my room.
Staying  in  a  simple  hotel  just  steps  from  the  bustle  of
workaday New Delhi will make it that much easier for me to
get the flavor of the city.
Lunch was at the top of my agenda. The very friendly
young man behind the concierge desk jumped to attention
when he saw me approaching. I asked about a good place to
eat. “There is a great restaurant just to the left of the hotel.
I recommend it highly,” he told me. “It is called Swagat. You
can’t miss it.”

It sounded perfect. I walked out to the road and looked to
the left. The street was a whirlwind of colors, smells, and
activities. I saw a grocery store, a cloth vendor, a family of
five all piled onto one motor scooter, and a bunch of brown-
speckled chickens pecking in the dust next to the sidewalk.
No restaurant.
“You  didn’t  find  it?”  the  kind  concierge  asked  in  a
puzzled tone as I re-entered the hotel. This time the young
man explained, “Just walk out of the hotel, cross the street,
and  the  restaurant  will  be  on  your  left.  It’s  next  to  the
market. There is a sign. You can’t miss it,” he said again.
Well,  apparently  I  could.  I  tried  to  do  exactly  as
instructed, crossing the street immediately in front of the
hotel and again looking to the left. As I saw no sign of the
restaurant, I turned to the left and walked a while. It was a
little  confusing,  as  the  street  was  jam-packed.  After  a
minute or so, I came to a small side street full of people,
food stalls, and women selling sandals and saris. Was this
the  market  the  concierge  mentioned?  But  after  careful
examination of what I felt to be all possible interpretations
of “on your left,” I began to wonder if I was being filmed as
a stunt for some type of reality TV show. I headed back to
the hotel.
The concierge smiled kindly at me again, but I could tell
he was thinking I really wasn’t very smart. Scratching his
head in bewilderment at my inability to find the obvious, he
announced, “I will take you there.” So we left the hotel,
crossed the street, turned to the left, and then walked for
nearly ten minutes, weaving our way through traffic on the
bustling  sidewalk  and  passing  several  side  streets  and
countless heads of cattle on the way. At last, just beyond a
large bank, perched quietly over a fruit store on the second
floor of a yellow stucco building, I spotted a small sign that
read Swagat.
As I thanked the concierge for his extreme kindness, I
couldn’t help wondering why he hadn’t told me, “Cross the
street, turn left, walk nine minutes, look for the big bank on

the corner, and, when you see the big fruit store, look up to
the second floor of the yellow stucco building for a sign with
the restaurant’s name.”
And as this question floated through my mind, I could tell
that  the  kindly  concierge  was  wondering,  “How  will  this
poor,  dim-witted  woman  possibly  make  it  through  the
week?”
As my search for lunch in New Delhi suggests, the skills
involved  in  being  an  effective  communicator  vary
dramatically  from  one  culture  to  another.  In  the  United
States and other Anglo-Saxon cultures, people are trained
(mostly  subconsciously)  to  communicate  as  literally  and
explicitly  as  possible.  Good  communication  is  all  about
clarity  and  explicitness,  and  accountability  for  accurate
transmission  of  the  message  is  placed  firmly  on  the
communicator: “If you don’t understand, it’s my fault.”
By  contrast,  in  many  Asian  cultures,  including  India,
China, Japan, and Indonesia, messages are often conveyed
implicitly, requiring the listener to read between the lines.
Good communication is subtle, layered, and may depend on
copious subtext, with responsibility for transmission of the
message shared between the one sending the message and
the  one  receiving  it.  The  same  applies  to  many  African
cultures, including those found in Kenya and Zimbabwe, and
to a lesser degree Latin American cultures (such as Mexico,
Brazil, and Argentina) and Latin European cultures (such as
Spain, Italy, Portugal) including France.
The fact is that the hotel concierge provided all of the
information necessary for someone from his own culture to
find  Swagat.  An  Indian  living  in  the  same  Delhi  cultural
context  would  likely  have  figured  out  quickly  where  the
restaurant was by the clues provided; she would have been
eating her lunch while I was still wandering wearily around
the streets.
My quest for the Swagat restaurant illustrates that being
a  good  listener  is  just  as  important  for  effective
communication as being a good speaker. And both of these

essential  skills  are  equally  variable  from  one  culture  to
another.
* * *
It was springtime in France, where I had been living several
years, when I was asked to give a presentation at a human
resource conference in Paris sponsored by Owens Corning.
A leading global producer of residential building materials,
Owens Corning is headquartered in Toledo, Ohio—a good
eleven-hour drive from my home state of Minnesota, but still
within  the  tribal  boundaries  of  my  native  midwestern
American culture.
When I arrived at the conference, I found fifty human
resource  directors  assembled  in  a  typical  Parisian  hotel
space with high ceilings and sunshine streaming through
floor-to-ceiling  windows.  Thirty-eight  of  the  participants
were from Toledo; the rest were from Europe and Asia, but
all  had  been  working  for  Owens  Corning  for  at  least  a
decade. I took a seat in the back corner of the room just as
the presentation preceding mine was beginning.
The speaker would be David Brown, the company’s CEO.
Relaxed and unimposing, wearing a blazer but no tie, David
strolled into the room wearing a warm smile and greeted
several of the attendees by their first name. But from the
hush that descended when he stepped to the podium, it was
obvious that this group of HR directors considered him a
celebrity. Brown spent sixty intense minutes describing his
vision of the company’s future. He spoke in simple words,
repeating  key  points  and  reinforcing  his  messages  with
bullet-pointed slides. The group listened carefully, asked a
few respectful questions, and gave Brown an appreciative
round of applause before he departed.
Now it was my turn. My job was to talk about the subject
I know best—cross-cultural management. I worked with the
group for an hour, explaining in detail the Communicating
scale and its value as a tool for understanding how various
cultures  convey  messages.  As  if  to  reinforce  my  theme,

Kenji Takaki, a Japanese HR executive who had lived for two
years  in  Toledo,  raised  his  hand  and  offered  this
observation:
In Japan, we implicitly learn, as we are growing up, to
communicate between the lines and to listen between
the lines when others are speaking. Communicating
messages without saying them directly is a deep part
of  our  culture,  so  deep  that  we  do  it  without  even
realizing it. To give an example, every year in Japan
there is a vote for the most popular new word. A few
years ago, the word of the year was “KY.” It stands for
kuuki yomenai, which means “one who cannot read
the air”—in other words, a person sorely lacking the
ability to read between the lines. In Japan if you can’t
read the air, you are not a good listener.
At this point one of the Americans broke in, “What do you
mean, ‘read the air’?”
Takaki explained, “If I am in a meeting in Japan and one
person  is  implicitly  communicating  disagreement  or
discomfort, we should be able to read the atmosphere to
pick up on that discomfort. If someone else doesn’t pick up
the message we say, ‘He is a KY guy!’”
The  American  chuckled,  “I  guess  that  means  we
Americans  are  all  KY  guys!”  Takaki  offered  no  comment,
which I read as an indication that he agreed. Then Takaki
continued:
When Mr. Brown was giving his presentation, I was
working hard to listen with all of my senses—to make
sure I was picking up all of the messages that he was
trying to pass. But now as I am listening to Erin I am
asking  myself:  Is  it  possible  there  was  no  meaning
beyond Mr. Brown’s very simple words? And with all
of you in this very room, whom I have worked with for
so  many  years,  when  I  read  the  air  during  our

discussions, am I picking up messages you had not
intended to pass?
This was a very astute question—and a very disturbing
one. The group fell silent, with a few jaws hanging slightly
agape, as Takaki quietly read the air.
* * *
The contrasting styles of communication represented by the
managers from Toledo and their colleague from Japan are
often  referred  to  as low-context  and high-context,
respectively.
In order to understand some of the implications, suppose
you are having a discussion with Sally, a business colleague,
and you both come from a culture that prefers low-context
communication. People from such cultures are conditioned
from childhood to assume a low level of shared context—
that is, few shared reference points and comparatively little
implicit knowledge linking speaker and listener.
Under these circumstances, it’s highly likely that, while
speaking with Sally, you will explicitly spell out your ideas,
providing  all  the  background  knowledge  and  details
necessary  to  understand  your  message.  In  low-context
cultures, effective communication must be simple, clear, and
explicit in order to effectively pass the message, and most
communicators will obey this requirement, usually without
being fully conscious of it. The United States is the lowest-
context  culture  in  the  world,  followed  by  Canada  and
Australia,  the  Netherlands  and  Germany,  and  the  United
Kingdom.
Though  cultural  norms  are  transmitted  from  one
generation  to  the  next  through  means  that  are  generally
indirect and subliminal, you may remember receiving some
deliberate  lessons  concerning  appropriate  ways  to
communicate. I certainly received such lessons as a child
growing up in the United States. My third-grade teacher,
Mary Jane, a tall, thin woman with tightly curled hair, used

to  coach  us  during  our  Monday  morning  circle  meetings
using the motto, “Say what you mean and mean what you
say.”  When  I  was  sixteen,  I  took  an  elective  class  at
Minneapolis  South  High  School  on  giving  effective
presentations.  This  is  where  I  learned  the  traditional
American  rule  for  successfully  transferring  a  powerful
message to an audience: “Tell them what you are going to
tell them, then tell them, then tell them what you’ve told
them.” This is the philosophy of low-context communication
in a nutshell.
I received lessons in low-context communication at home,
too.  Like  many  siblings,  my  older  brother  and  I  argued
constantly. In an effort to reduce our squabbling, Mom used
to coach us in active listening: You speak to me as clearly
and explicitly as possible. Then I’ll repeat what I understood
you to say as clearly and explicitly as I can. The technique is
designed  to  help  people  quickly  identify  and  correct
misunderstandings,  thereby  reducing  (if  not  eliminating)
one common cause of needless, pointless debate.
Childhood  lessons  like  these  imbued  me  with  the
assumption   that   being   explicit   is   simply   good
communication.   But,   as   Takaki   explained,   good
communication in a high-context culture like Japan is very
different.  In  Japan  as  in  India,  China,  and  many  other
countries,  people  learn  a  very  different  style  of
communication  as  children—one  that  depends  on
unconscious  assumptions  about  common  reference  points
and shared knowledge.
For example, let’s say that you and a business colleague
named Maryam both come from a high-context culture like
Iran. Imagine that Maryam has traveled to your home for a
visit and arrived via a late-evening train at 10:00 p.m. If you
ask Maryam whether she would like to eat something before
going  to  bed,  when  Maryam  responds  with  a  polite  “No,
thank  you,”  your  response  will  be  to  ask  her  two  more
times. Only if she responds “No, thank you” three times will
you accept “No” as her real answer.

The  explanation  lies  in  shared  assumptions  that  every
polite Iranian understands. Both you and Maryam know that
a well-mannered person will not accept food the first time it
is offered, no matter how hungry she may be. Thus, if you
don’t ask her a second or third time, Maryam may go to bed
suffering from hunger pains, while you feel sorry that she
hasn’t tasted the chicken salad you’d prepared especially
for her.
In a high-context culture like Iran, it’s not necessary—
indeed,  it’s  often  inappropriate—to  spell  out  certain
messages too explicitly. If Maryam replied to your first offer
of food, “Yes, please serve me a big portion of whatever you
have, because I am dying of hunger!” this response would
be  considered  inelegant  and  perhaps  quite  rude.
Fortunately,  shared  assumptions  learned  from  childhood
make  such  bluntness  unnecessary.  You  and  Maryam  both
know that “No, thank you” likely means, “Please ask me
again because I am famished.”
Remember my confusing encounter with the concierge in
New  Delhi?  If  I  had  been  an  Indian  from  Delhi  with  the
shared cultural understanding of how to interpret implicit
messages, I would have been better able to interpret the
concierge’s directions. Lacking those assumptions left me
bewildered and unable to find my way to the restaurant.
THE INTERPLAY OF LANGUAGE AND HISTORY
Languages reflect the communication styles of the cultures
that use those languages. For example, Japanese and Hindi
(as spoken in New Delhi) are both high-context languages,
in  which  a  relatively  high  percentage  of  words  can  be
interpreted multiple ways based on how and when they are
used. In Japanese, for instance, the word “ashi” means both
“leg”  and  “foot,”  depending  on  context.  Japanese  also
possesses countless homonyms, of which there are only a
few in English (“dear” and “deer,” for example). In Hindi the
word “kal” means both tomorrow and yesterday. You have to

hear the whole sentence to understand in which context it
has been used. For this reason, when speaking Japanese or
Hindi, you really do have to “read the air” to understand the
message.
I  work  in  English  and  also  in  French,  a  much  higher-
context  language  than  English.  For  one  thing,  there  are
seven times more words in English than in French (500,000
versus  70,000),  which  suggests  that  French  relies  on
contextual  clues  to  resolve  semantic  ambiguities  to  a
greater extent than English. Many words in French have
multiple possible meanings—for example, ennuyé can mean
either “bored” or “bothered” depending on the context in
which  it’s  used—which  means  that  the  listener  is
responsible for discerning the intention of the speaker.
The French language contains a number of idioms that
specifically  refer  to  high-context  communication.  One  is
sous-entendu, literally meaning “under the heard.” To use a
sous-entendu  basically  means  to  say  something  without
saying it. For example, if a man says to his wife, “There are
a lot of calories in that toffee ice cream you bought,” his
sous-entendu  may  be  “You  have  gained  some  weight,  so
don’t eat this ice cream.” He has not explicitly said that she
is getting fat, but when he sees her reach down to throw a
shoe  at  him,  he  will  know  that  she  picked  up  his sous-
entendu.
I once asked a French client, who was complaining about
an incompetent team leader, whether he had described the
problem to his boss. The client responded. “Well, yes, but it
was a sous-entendu. I made it known so that he could see it
if  he  wanted  to  see  it.”  The  same  expressions  exist  in
Spanish (sobrentendido) and Portuguese (subentendido) and
although less common, they are used in much the same way.
A similar French expression refers to saying something
at the deuxième degré (literally, “the second degree”). I may
say one thing explicitly—my first-degree message—but the
statement  may  have  an  unspoken  subtext  which  is  the
second-degree meaning.

The  use  of  second-degree  messages  is  a  feature  of
French literature. Consider the seventeenth-century writer
Jean de La Fontaine. At the first degree, he wrote simple
children’s  tales,  but  if  you  understand  the  contemporary
context within which the stories were written, you may pick
up his second degree of meaning—a political message for
adults.  For  example,  La  Fontaine’s  famous  fable  of  the
grasshopper and the ant conveys a straightforward moral
that most children understand: It’s important to economize
to prepare for difficult times. But only sophisticated adult
readers  of  his  own  day  recognized  La  Fontaine’s  second-
degree message—that King Louis XIV should stop spending
so much money on rerouting the Eure River to supply water
to the Versailles fountains.
In  France,  a  good  business  communicator  will  use
second-degree communication in everyday life. While giving
a presentation, a manager may say one thing that has an
explicit meaning everyone understands. But those who have
some  shared  context  may  also  receive  a  second-degree
message that is the real intended meaning.
English,  then,  is  a  lower-context  language  than  the
Romance languages descended from Latin (French, Spanish,
Italian, and Portuguese), while the Romance languages are
lower context than most Asian languages. However, a look
at the Communicating scale and its ranking of cultures from
most explicit to most implicit shows that language is not the
whole story (see Figure 1.1).
The  United  States  is  the  lowest-context  culture  in  the
world, and all Anglo-Saxon cultures fall on the left-hand side
of the scale, with the United Kingdom as the highest-context
culture  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  cluster.  All  the  countries  that
speak  Romance  languages,  including  European  countries
like Italy, Spain, and France, and Latin American countries
like Mexico, Brazil, and Argentina, fall to the middle right of
the scale. Brazil is the lowest-context culture in this cluster.
Many African and Asian countries fall even further right.

Japan  has  the  distinction  of  being  the  highest-context
culture in the world.

FIGURE 1.1.
COMMUNICATING
As you can see, language only gives a partial indicator as
to where a culture will fall on the Communicating scale. The
gap between the United States and the United Kingdom,
both  Anglo-Saxon  countries,  is  quite  large,  as  is  the  gap
between Brazil and Peru, both Romance-language countries.
Beyond  language,  the  history  of  a  country  strongly
impacts  its  position  on  the  Communicating  scale.  For  an
example, just think for a minute about the histories of the
two bookend countries on the scale, the United States and
Japan.
High-context cultures tend to have a long shared history.
Usually  they  are  relationship-oriented  societies  where
networks of connections are passed on from generation to
generation,  generating  more  shared  context  among
community  members.  Japan  is  an  island  society  with  a
homogeneous population and thousands of years of shared

history,  during  a  significant  portion  of  which  Japan  was
closed off from the rest of the world. Over these thousands
of years, people became particularly skilled at picking up
each other’s messages—reading the air, as Takaki said.
By contrast, the United States, a country with a mere few
hundred  years  of  shared  history,  has  been  shaped  by
enormous  inflows  of  immigrants  from  various  countries
around  the  world,  all  with  different  histories,  different
languages,  and  different  backgrounds.  Because  they  had
little shared context, Americans learned quickly that if they
wanted to pass a message, they had to make it as explicit
and  clear  as  possible,  with  little  room  for  ambiguity  and
misunderstanding.
So within each language cluster you may notice a pattern
(see Figure 1.2). First, countries are clustered by language
type. On the left, you see the Anglo-Saxon cluster, followed
by the Romance language cluster, and finally, furthest to the
right, is a cluster of countries speaking Asian languages.
Then within each cluster, you might notice how length of
history and level of homogeneity impact the communication
style.  For  example,  within  the  Anglo-Saxon  cluster,  the
United States has the most linguistic and cultural diversity
and the shortest shared history. This helps to explain why
the United States is the lowest-context of the Anglo-Saxon
cultures.  In  the  Romance  cluster,  Brazil  has  the  most
diversity  and  is  the  lowest-context  culture.  The  same
pattern holds with Asia, where the lower-context countries
like  Singapore  and  India  have  the  most  linguistic  and
cultural diversity.

FIGURE 1.2.
COMMUNICATING
The American anthropologist Edward Hall, who originally
developed  the  concept  of  low-  and  high-context
communication  while  working  on  Native  American
reservations  in  the  1930s,  often  used  the  analogy  of
marriage to describe the differences between high- and low-
context  communication.  Imagine  what  happens  when  two
people are married for fifty or sixty years. Having shared
the  same  context  for  so  long,  they  can  gather  enormous
amounts of information just by looking at each other’s faces
or  gestures.  Newlyweds,  however,  need  to  state  their
messages explicitly and repeat them frequently to ensure
they are received accurately.
1
 The comparison to countries
with longer or shorter shared histories is obvious.
WHAT MAKES A GOOD COMMUNICATOR?
In everyday life, we all communicate explicitly sometimes,
while  passing  messages  between  the  lines  in  other
situations.  But  when  you  say  someone  is  “a  good

communicator,”  what  exactly  do  you  mean?  The  way  you
answer this question suggests where you fall on the scale.
A  Dutch  executive  in  one  of  my  classes  noticed  his
country’s  low-context  positioning  on  the  scale  and
protested, “We speak between the lines in the Netherlands,
too.”  But  when  asked  whether  a  businessman  who
communicates  between  the  lines  frequently  would  be
considered a good or a bad communicator, he didn’t have to
think long. “Bad. That’s the difference between us and the
French,” he said. “In the Netherlands, if you don’t say it
straight, we don’t think you are trustworthy.”
If you’re from a low-context culture, you may perceive a
high-context   communicator   as   secretive,   lacking
transparency,  or  unable  to  communicate  effectively.  Lou
Edmondson, an American vice president for sales at Kraft
who  travels  around  the  world  negotiating  deals  with
suppliers in Asia and Eastern Europe, put it starkly: “I have
always believed that people say what they mean and mean
what they say—and if they don’t, well, then, they are lying.”
On the other hand, if you’re from a high-context culture,
you  might  perceive  a  low-context  communicator  as
inappropriately stating the obvious (“You didn’t have to say
it!  We  all  understood!”),  or  even  as  condescending  and
patronizing (“You talk to us like we are children!”). Although
I have lived and worked outside the United States for many
years, low-context communication is still my natural style.
I’m embarrassed to admit that I have been subjected to both
of  these  accusations  more  than  once  by  my  European
colleagues.
A few years ago, a New York–based financial institution
that I’d worked with previously asked me to do a cultural
audit of their organization. Since corporate culture is not
my  specialty  and  I  lacked  the  time  necessary  to  do  this
project justice, I approached an Italian colleague whom I’ll
call Paolo about collaborating with me.
Paolo greeted me cheerfully when we met in his office.
Twenty-five  years  my  senior,  Paolo  has  a  well-earned

reputation as an exceptional researcher and writer. He gave
me a copy of his newest book and listened with interest as I
described  the  collaboration  opportunity.  I  started  by
explaining that my work, family, and writing commitments
provided very little time for this project. Paolo nodded, and
then the two of us explored the opportunity in more depth,
discussing the client company and the specific issues that
needed to be addressed. Still feeling a bit anxious about my
time limitations, I repeated that Paolo would need to do 80
percent of the work (and would of course receive 80 percent
of the compensation). Then we returned to exploring the
needs of the client and possible approaches, but after a few
more minutes, I once again slipped in my concern about
time.
Paolo laughed impatiently: “Erin, I am not a child. I was
not born yesterday. I understand very well what your point
is.”  I  felt  myself  blushing  with  embarrassment.  Paolo  is
quite used to reading subtle messages; he had grasped my
not-so-subtle point the first time. I apologized, wondering
whether Paolo often reacted this way when speaking with
the dozens of American faculty members at INSEAD who
clarify and repeat themselves endlessly.
The moral of the story is clear: You may be considered a
top-flight  communicator  in  your  home  culture,  but  what
works at home may not work so well with people from other
cultures.
One interesting quirk is that in high-context cultures, the
more educated and sophisticated you are, the greater your
ability to both speak and listen with an understanding of
implicit,  layered  messages.  By  contrast,  in  low-context
cultures,  the  most  educated  and  sophisticated  business
people are those who communicate in a clear, explicit way.
The  result  is  that  the  chairman  of  a  French  or  Japanese
company is likely to be a lot more high-context than those
who work on the shop floor of the same company, while the
chairman of an American or Australian organization is likely
to be more low-context than those with entry-level jobs in

the same organization. In this respect, education tends to
move  individuals  toward  a  more  extreme  version  of  the
dominant cultural tendency.
IT’S ALL RELATIVE
As  we’ve  noted,  when  considering  the  impact  of  cultural
differences  on  your  dealings  with  other  people,  what
matters  is  not  so  much  the  absolute  positioning  of  a
person’s  culture  on  a  particular  scale,  but  rather  their
relative positioning in comparison to you. The examples that
follow  illustrate  how  this  principle  applies  to  the
Communicating scale.
Both Americans and British fall toward the low-context
end of the Communicating scale. But the British speak more
between  the  lines  than  Americans  do,  a  tendency
particularly apparent with British high-context humor. Many
British people are fond of delivering ironic or sarcastic jokes
with a completely deadpan face. Unfortunately, this kind of
humor  is  lost  on  many  Americans;  they may suspect  the
British person is joking but they don’t dare laugh, just in
case he is not.
As a result, the British often say that Americans “don’t
understand irony.” However, a more precise explanation is
that  Americans  are  simply  more  low-context  than  the
British.  So  when  Americans  make  a  joke,  especially  in  a
professional  setting,  they  are  likely  to  indicate  clearly
through explicit verbal or physical cues, “This is a joke,”
something totally unnecessary when one British person is
speaking to another. In their higher-context culture, if you
have to tell us it was a joke, then it wasn’t worth the breath
you used to tell it.
Alastair Murray, a British manager living in Dubai, offers
this example:
I was participating in a long-distance bike race across
the UAE desert with hundreds of participants. In order

to be collegial, I took a turn riding in front of another
biker in order to break the headwind for him and help
him save a little energy. A stranger had recently done
the same for me.
A little later the biker peddled up next to me and
said in a thick American accent, “Thanks very much
for your help!”
I replied, “Oh, sure! But I wouldn’t have done it if
I’d known you were American.”
To someone British it would have been clear that
this was a joke, and even a sort of gentle reaching-out
of friendliness. But as I delivered it straight-faced and
with a serious voice, the American didn’t seem to get
it. He rode next to me in silence, beginning to pull
slightly to the side.
So then I thought about how often Americans say
“just kidding” after a joke. So I gave it a go. I told him,
“Oh, hey, just kidding!”
And he responded, “Oh! All right! Ha ha! That was
a good one. Where are you from?”
Oh, gosh, I thought. . . . these literal Americans!
The British may be more high-context than Americans—
particularly where humor is concerned—but in comparison
with Latin Europeans such as Spain and Italy and including
the French they are very low-context.
I once worked with Stuart Shuttleworth, the CEO, owner,
and  founder  of  a  small  British  investment  firm  that  had
grown  over  thirty  years  from  a  one-man  shop  into  a
company with one hundred employees. Two years earlier, he
had  begun  expanding  the  business  internationally.
Shuttleworth explained to me the cultural quandaries this
expansion had created for him:
Every day, as I see how my new counterparts work in
Spain, France, and Italy, I am asking myself if it is
possible  that  what  is  obvious  common  sense  to  me

may  not  be  common  sense  in  those  environments.
Take, for example, the simple process of recapping a
meeting. In the U.K., it is common sense that at the
end of a meeting you should verbally recap what has
been decided, which is most frequently followed by a
written recap, including individual action items, which
we send out to all meeting participants. Clarification,
clarification,  clarification—in  the  U.K.  this  is  simply
good business practice.
I attended a meeting the other day in Paris with a
group of my France-based employees and one of our
Parisian clients. As the meeting was clearly winding
down, I awaited the final “Here’s what we’ve decided”
recap  of  the  meeting.  Instead,  one  of  the  clients
announced dramatically “Et voilà!” [There it is!] as if
everything had been made clear. The others all stood
up  patting one  another  on  the  back  and  shaking
hands,  stating  words  of  appreciation  and  future
collaboration.
I  couldn’t  help  but  wonder,  “But  voilà  what?”  It
seems that my French colleagues simply know what
has  been  decided  and  who  should  do  what  without
going through all of the levels of clarification that we
are used to in the U.K.
Shuttleworth was also confused by the e-mail etiquette
he encountered:
In the U.K., as in the U.S., if you send someone an e-
mail and that person doesn’t have the answer at their
fingertips, both common sense and etiquette call for
the  receiver  to  respond  within  24  hours  saying
something like, “I got your message and will get back
to  you  on  Wednesday.”  In  other  words,  even  if  you
have nothing to say, you should spell out explicitly in a
low-context way when you will have something to say.

Lack  of  explicit  communication  signifies  something
negative.
Now, I send an e-mail to our Spanish supplier—who
I know does high-quality and on-time work and has a
very good level of English—and I may not hear back
from him or any of his colleagues for three or four
days.  I  am  biting  my  nails  assuming  all  sorts  of
problems with my request that prevent a speedy reply
. . . either that or the entire staff has fallen ill or the
building has burned down so that no one can read
their e-mails.
And  then  three  days  later,  I  receive  an  e-mail
telling me that they have done exactly as requested
and  everything  is  under  control.  Why  couldn’t  they
have said that in the first place?!
French,  Spanish,  and  Italian  are  markedly  more  high-
context than Anglo-Saxon cultures. But the cultures of Asia
are  even more  high-context  than  any  in  Europe.  As  the
center  of  the  business  world  tilts  towards  China,
understanding  the  communication  patterns  typical  of
Chinese culture becomes increasingly critical.
Elisabeth  Shen  is  a  consultant  who  splits  her  time
between  Shanghai  and  Paris,  helping  Europeans  work
effectively with the Chinese. This can be quite challenging,
since,  as  Shen  observes,  “China  is  a  huge  country  with
strong regional differences. In many ways it is difficult to
categorize  Chinese  business  culture,  given  its  wide
generational  gaps  and  differences  between  private  and
public  sectors.”  However,  it’s  safe  to  say  that  Chinese
culture in general is very high-context in comparison with
the cultures of the West. Shen explains:
When Chinese vaguely express an idea or an opinion,
the  real  message  is  often  just  implied.  They  expect
their conversational partner to be highly involved and
to take an active role in deciphering messages, as well

as in mutually creating meaning. In Chinese culture,
pang qiao ce ji [beating around the bush] is a style
that  nurtures  an  implicit  understanding.  In  Chinese
culture,  children  are  taught  not  to  just  hear  the
explicit words but also to focus on how something is
said, and on what is not said.
I  collaborated  with  Shen  to  conduct  interviews  with
dozens of European managers from various business sectors
who  had  spent  significant  portions  of  their  careers  in
different  regions  of  China.  They  had  varying  opinions  on
how to succeed in a Chinese environment. In one of these
interviews, Pablo Díaz, a Spanish executive who worked in
China  for  a  Chinese  textile  company  for  fifteen  years,
remarked,  “In  China,  the  message  up  front  is  not
necessarily the real message. My Chinese colleagues would
drop  hints,  and  I  wouldn’t  pick  them  up.  Later,  when
thinking  it  over,  I would  realize  I  had  missed  something
important.”  Díaz  recounts  a  discussion  he  had  with  a
Chinese employee which went something like this:
MR. DÍAZ: It looks like some of us are going to have
to be here on Sunday to host the client visit.
MR. CHEN: I see.
MR. DÍAZ: Can you join us on Sunday?
MR. CHEN: Yes, I think so.
MR. DÍAZ: That would be a great help.
MR. CHEN: Yes, Sunday is an important day.
MR. DÍAZ: In what way?
MR. CHEN: It’s my daughter’s birthday.
MR. DÍAZ: How nice. I hope you all enjoy it.
MR. CHEN: Thank you. I appreciate your
understanding.
2
Díaz laughs about the situation now. “I was quite certain
he had said he was coming,” Díaz says. “And Mr. Chen was
quite certain he had communicated that he absolutely could

not  come  because  he  was  going  to  be  celebrating  his
daughter’s birthday with his family.”
Díaz has learned from experience how to avoid falling
into these communication snafus:
If I’m not 100 percent sure what I heard, shrugging
my shoulders and leaving with the message that I sort
of think I heard is not a good strategy. If I am not sure,
I  have  to  take  the  responsibility  to  ask  for
clarification. Sometimes I have to ask three or four
times, and although that can be a little embarrassing
for  both  me  and  my  colleague,  it  is  not  as
embarrassing  as  having  a  production  line  set  and
ready and waiting for Mr. Chen, who is contentedly
singing happy birthday somewhere else.
STRATEGIES FOR WORKING WITH PEOPLE
FROM HIGHER-CONTEXT CULTURES
As  you  can  see,  communicating  across  cultures  can  be
fraught  with  invisible  difficulties.  Whether  you  consider
yourself  a  low-context  or  high-context  communicator,  it’s
quite likely you will one day find yourself working with a
colleague, client, or partner positioned further to the right
on the scale. So being an agile communicator, able to move
adroitly in either direction, is a valuable skill for anyone in
business.
When  considering  strategies  for  improving  your
effectiveness,  one  crucial  principle  to  remember  is  that
communicating is not just about speaking but also listening.
Pablo Díaz has learned this from experience. “It isn’t just
that my Chinese employees speak between the lines,” he
says. “They are also always trying to find out what is behind
a  comment.  This  type  of  listening  is  not  natural  for
Westerners, who take everything at face value.”
So  when  you  work  with  higher-context  colleagues,
practice  listening  more  carefully.  “The  best  advice  I  can

give,”  Díaz  says,  “is  to  learn  to  listen  to  what  is meant
instead of what is said. This means reflecting more, asking
more clarifying questions, and making an effort to be more
receptive to body language cues.” By searching for implicit
cues,  you  can  begin  to  “read  the  air”  a  little  more
accurately.
Think back to the dialogue between Mr. Chen and Mr.
Díaz above. In this dialogue, Mr. Chen says “yes,” but he
simultaneously  indicates  that  the  real  answer  is  “no.”
Saying “no” between the lines is common throughout Asia,
including  China,  Japan,  and  Korea,  and  especially  when
speaking to a boss or a client. If you work with a supplier or
a team member from one of these countries, you’ll discover
that “no” can come in many guises. A question like “Can you
complete this project by next week?” may be greeted by a
sharp sucking-in of breath or a noncommittal answer: “It
will be very difficult, but I’ll do my best,” “We’ll think about
it,” or “It will be hard for these reasons, but let me consider
it.”
With practice, you can learn to read the “no” between
the lines. For verification, ask open-ended questions rather
than backing the person into a corner that requires a yes or
no response. For example, Mr. Díaz could have asked an
open-ended  clarifying  question  such  as,  “How  difficult
would it be for you to get away from the party to come to
work for a few hours?” With persistence, more information
will emerge.
“It is important not to form opinions too quickly,” Díaz
suggests, “to listen more, speak less, and then clarify when
you are not sure if you understood. You might need to work
through another local person in order to get the message
deciphered. But if you feel confused, work to get all the
information you need to pick up the intended message.” One
of  the  biggest  mistakes  lower-context  managers  make  is
assuming  that  the  other  individual  is purposely  omitting
information or unable to communicate explicitly. Most often,
the higher-context person is simply communicating in the

style  to  which  he  is  accustomed,  with  no  thought  of
confusing or misleading you. Simply asking for clarification
can work wonders. After a while, you may find you don’t
have to ask so many times for clarity, as your counterpart
also learns to adapt to you.
If you are the one sending the message, you may find
there  is  less  need  to  repeat  yourself  endlessly  when
speaking with high-context colleagues who listen between
the  lines.  Before  repeating  yourself,  stop  talking.  Wait  to
learn  whether  saying  it  once  is  enough.  You  can  always
come back to the topic later if you’re not sure whether the
message got through.
When  you  find  yourself  stymied  or  frustrated  by
misunderstanding,  self-deprecation,  laughing  at  yourself,
and using positive words to describe the other culture are
always good options. For example, when I was searching for
the Swagat restaurant in New Delhi, I could have mentioned
to  the  concierge  that  I  come  from  a  country  with  small
towns,  few  people,  and  lots  of  signposts:  “Indian  people
have a knack for finding things that I do not have. Please be
so kind as to draw me a map marking every landmark or
street I will see on the way to the restaurant.” Or I might
have said, “I am really bad at finding things, and this city is
totally  new  to  me.  Could  you  please  make  me  a  simple
drawing  that  a  young  child  could  read,  marking  exactly
what I will see on each step of my way and each road I will
cross? If you could include exactly how many minutes it will
take me to walk for each part of the journey, that will help,
as  I  do  have  a  poor  sense  of  direction.”  Self-deprecation
allows you to accept the blame for being unable to get the
message and then ask for assistance.
STRATEGIES FOR WORKING WITH PEOPLE
FROM LOWER-CONTEXT CULTURES
Having  consulted  frequently  with  Western  companies
outsourcing  to  India,  I  was  quite  used  to  hearing  the

comments, “When I explained what needed to be done to my
Indian team, there were no questions. Later, I realized they
hadn’t understood my instructions. Why didn’t they ask for
clarification?”
Later,  when  the  Indian  Institute  of  Planning  and
Management organized a multiple-city tour where I was to
work  with  executives  in  four  Indian  cities,  I  experienced
more of this high-context communication. As I prepared for
the trip, I frequently found myself communicating by both
phone  and  e-mail  with  the  university  organizers,  asking
questions like, “Who exactly will be attending my sessions?
What kinds of international experience do they have? Why
are  they  interested  in  hearing  from  me?  What  sorts  of
questions should I anticipate?” Unfortunately, the responses
I  received  were  so  high-context  that  I  often  felt  more
confused than before I asked. The names, backgrounds, and
specific  business  needs  of  the  attendees  remained  vague
and unknown to me until I arrived in the classroom.
These experiences prepared me well for a question that
one of the class participants asked me during a lunch break.
“Madam,” he said politely, “what you have taught us this
morning  is  very  important  to  my  daily  job.  I  have  never
traveled outside India, but I work every day by phone and e-
mail with American, Australian, and British clients. What is
the  best  way  to  build  trust  with  these  colleagues  and
customers?”
Thinking back to my difficulties of a few weeks earlier as
well  as  previous  experience  working  with  Western
companies outsourcing to India, I had a ready response:
Be  as  transparent,  clear,  and  specific  as  possible.
Explain  exactly  why  you  are  calling.  Assert  your
opinions  transparently.  Show  all  of  your  cards  up
front. At the end of the phone call, recap all the key
points again, or send an e-mail repeating these points
straight afterwards. If you are ever not 100 percent
sure  what  you  have  been  asked  to  do,  don’t  read

between  the  lines  but  state  clearly  that  you  don’t
understand and ask for clarification. And sometimes it
would be better to not be quite so polite, as it gives
the impression of vagueness or uncertainty.
With a little effort and practice, someone from a higher-
context environment can learn to work and communicate in
a  lower-context  way.  Focus  on  recognizing  when  you  are
expecting the other person to read your intended message
between the lines and get in the habit of conveying it more
explicitly. Start the conversation by stating the main idea,
make your points clearly, and at the end of the discussion
recap what has been decided and what will happen next. If
you’re  not  sure  whether  your  ideas  have  been  absorbed,
then feel free to ask, “Am I clear enough?” Follow up with
an e-mail clarifying anything that might still be a bit vague
and stating the main conclusions in writing.
I’ve come across people from high-context cultures who
have  gotten  so  good  at  switching  their  styles  that  they
become as low-context as the American on the other end of
the phone line.
STRATEGIES FOR MULTICULTURAL
COLLABORATIONS
What if you have a blend of many cultures all on one team—
Americans who recap incessantly and nail everything down
in writing, Japanese who read the air, French who speak at
the second degree, British who love to use deadpan irony as
a form of humor, and Chinese who learn as young children
to  beat  around  the  bush?  Where  do  you  suppose  the
greatest likelihood of misunderstanding will arise? Consider
three options:
A. One low-context person communicating with
someone from another low-context culture (for

example, a Dutchman communicating with a
Canadian)
B. A high-context person communicating with a
low-context person (for example, a Spaniard
communicating with a Dutchman)
C. One high-context person communicating with
someone from another high-context culture (for
example. a person from China communicating with
a Brazilian).
Many people assume that the answer is choice B—a low-
context/high-context  conversation.  The  correct  answer  is
choice C. On a multicultural team, most misunderstanding
takes  place  between  people  who  come  from  two  high-
context cultures with entirely different roots, such as the
Brazilians communicating with the Chinese.
High-context communication works beautifully when we
are from the same culture and interpret cultural cues the
same  way.  When  two  Japanese  people  communicate,  the
shared contextual understanding makes it easy for them to
read the air. Time is saved (no need to repeat an idea three
times), relationships are maintained (no need to tell you a
direct “no” when I can hint at it and you can pick up the
message), and group harmony is preserved. But when team
members  come  from  different  cultures,  high-context
communication breaks down. The speaker may be passing a
message between the lines, and the listener may be actively
focused  on  scanning  for  meaning.  But  because  the  two
individuals  come  from  completely  different  cultural
contexts,  the  message  received  is  different  from  the
message  sent,  and  the  likelihood  of  misunderstanding
multiplies.
Fortunately,  if  you  are  leading  a  multicultural  team,
there’s no need to count the number of team members from
the  left  and  right  hand  of  the  scale  and  multiply  by  the
number of members to figure out what to do. There is just

one easy strategy to remember: Multicultural teams need
low-context processes.
Pedro  Galvez,  a  Mexican  manager  at  Johnson  and
Johnson,  attended  my  weeklong  program  on  managing
global  virtual  teams.  He  found  himself  managing  a  team
that  included  both  Mexicans and  Saudi  Arabians—
representatives of two very different high-context cultures.
Galvez recalls:
The  Saudis  had  a  different  way  of  passing  and
interpreting  messages  from  the  Mexicans,  and  we
quickly  began  misunderstanding  one  another.
Following  a  miscommunication  between  one  of  my
Mexican  team  members  and  his  Saudi  colleague,  I
spoke with each of them about what had happened.
The Mexican told me, “I made it known, so he could
see it if he wanted to see it.” I could see that with this
kind  of  misunderstanding  occurring,  we  might  be
headed for serious trouble.
After  that  incident,  I  brought  the  team  together
and we set ground rules. I spoke about the likelihood
of  misunderstanding  given  our  different  languages,
our different cultural backgrounds, and the fact that
both of our cultures have a tendency to communicate
implicitly  and  pass  messages  between  the  lines.  I
asked  the  group  to  come  up  with  solutions  for
minimizing  misunderstanding,  and  in  small  groups
they  developed  a  process  for  how  we  would  work
together.
The list of ground rules developed by Galvez’s group was
simple but effective. Three levels of verification would take
place at the end of any meeting:
• One  person  would  recap  the  key  points  orally,
with  the  task  rotating  from  one  team  member  to
another.

• Each  person  would  summarize  orally  what  he
would do next.
• One person would send out a written recap, again
on a rotating basis.
A similar system of explicit recaps and summaries would
be used after one-on-one conversations or phone calls. The
purpose—to  catch  and  correct  any  misunderstandings  or
confusions.
If you have members from more than one high-context
culture on your team, lay out the issue and have the team
develop their own solutions, as Pedro did. Don’t wait until
problems arise. The best moment to develop the processes
is  when  the  team  is  forming, before  miscommunication
takes place.
And one more point. Galvez’s team added to their list of
rules  the  following  statement:  “This  is  our  team  culture,
which we have explicitly agreed on and all feel comfortable
with.” Galvez knew that making everyone comfortable with
the  explicit,  written  agreement  was  both  important  and
challenging. Putting things in writing may signify a lack of
trust in some high-context cultures. So when he asked the
group to begin putting things in writing, he made sure to lay
some groundwork.
WHEN SHOULD YOU PUT IT IN WRITING?
The more low-context the culture, the more people have a
tendency  to  put  everything  in  writing.  “That  was  a  fine
meeting—I’ll  send  out  a  written  recap.”  “Thanks  for  the
phone call—I’ll send you an e-mail listing the next steps.”
“You’re  hired—here’s  your  written  job  description  and  a
formal  offer  letter.”  This  explains  why,  compared  with
European and Asian companies, American businesses tend
to have more:

• Organizational  charts  (showing  on  paper  who
works for whom)
• Titles (describing exactly who is at what level)
• Written objectives (explaining who is responsible for
accomplishing what)
• Performance  appraisals  (stating  in  writing  how
each person is doing)
By  contrast,  many  high-context  cultures—particularly
those  of  Asia  and  Africa—have  a  strong  oral  tradition  in
which written documentation is considered less necessary.
The tendency to put everything in writing, which is a mark
of  professionalism  and  transparency  in  a  low-context
culture,  may  suggest  to  high-context  colleagues  that  you
don’t  trust  them  to  follow  through  on  their  verbal
commitments.
“This  happened  to  me!”  Bethari  Syamsudin,  an
Indonesian  manager  working  for  the  multinational
automotive supplier Valeo, told me. “My boss is German, but
my team is all Indonesian. In my culture, if we have a strong
relationship  and  come  to  a  spoken  agreement,  that  is
enough for me. So if you get off the phone and send me an
e-mail recapping in writing everything we have just decided,
that would be a clear sign to me that you don’t trust me.”
Bethari was willing to adapt her style in deference to the
wishes of her German superior. She recalls:
My boss asked me to do what I could to make the
communication  more  transparent  in  our  office.  He
complained that he often didn’t know what decisions
had been made and wanted a higher level of clarity. So
he asked me to send a written recap of our weekly
Bangkok team meeting to him and all participants in
order to boost the clarity.
I will never forget the reaction of my Indonesian
team  when  I  sent  out  the  first  recap  putting  all  of
them on copy. My good friend and colleague called

two minutes after the recap was sent out and said,
“Don’t you trust me, Bethari? I told you I would do it
in the meeting. You know I am good on my word.” She
thought  I  was  being  “political”—which  is  what  we
often say about the Europeans. I was caught between
the culture of my boss and the culture of my staff.
At the next team meeting, Bethari explained carefully to
the  team  why  she  was  putting  everything  in  writing  and
asked  for  their  indulgence.  “It  was  that  easy,”  she  says.
“Once people understood I was asking for a written recap
because the big boss requested it, they were fine with that.
And, as I explained that this was a very natural way to work
in Germany, they were doubly fine with it. If I ever need my
staff  to  behave  in  a  non-Indonesian  way,  I  now  start  by
explaining the cultural difference. If I don’t, the negative
reactions fly.”
If you work with a team that has both low-context and
high-context members, follow Bethari’s lead. Putting it in
writing reduces confusion and saves time for multi-cultural
teams. But make sure to explain up front why you are doing
it.
* * *
Now, let’s return to my adventures in New Delhi, from the
beginning of the chapter. After a delicious lunch of palak
paneer  I  left  the  Swagat  restaurant  and  returned  to  the
hotel.  The  same  friendly  concierge  smiled  warmly  as  I
approached. After telling him how much I enjoyed my lunch
I explained that I hoped to visit the Qutab Minar ancient
ruins  that  afternoon.  He  looked  a  little  nervous,  perhaps
weary after my difficulty finding the restaurant just down
the street. “Could you please map out for me step-by-step
exactly what I need to do at every moment in order to find
the ruins? As you have witnessed I’m not used to such a
busy city.” Perhaps now certain of my inability to maneuver
anywhere, let alone to the busy ruins in the middle of town,

he  said  to  me,  “Don’t  worry  Madam.  I  will  organize
everything. We have a driver who will take you right to the
entrance and pick you up in the same spot. In the meantime
I will provide you with a map with the address of the hotel
clearly marked and every landmark between here and the
ruins. And please take this card with my phone number on
it. If you get lost and can’t find the driver I will come and
find you myself.” And thus began a marvelous afternoon in
New Delhi.

2
The Many Faces of Polite
Evaluating Performance and
Providing Negative Feedback
Sabine  Dulac,  the  finance  director  we  met  in  the
introduction,  leaned  back  in  her  chair  and  let  out  a
frustrated  sigh.  Managing  Americans  was  proving  much
more difficult than she could have ever imagined. Her new
American  boss,  Jake  Webber,  had  reported  to  Dulac  that
several  of  her  team  members  had  complained  bitterly
following  their  first  round  of  performance  reviews  with
Dulac.  They  felt  she’d  been  brutal  and  unfair  in  her
feedback, focusing heavily on the negative points and hardly
mentioning all their hard work and accomplishments.
Dulac  was  dumbfounded.  The  way  she  had  provided
feedback was the same style she’d used successfully with
dozens  of  French  employees  with  great  success.  Where
were these complaints coming from?
Dulac was particularly confused because she’d expected
American  culture  to  be  very  direct.  “In  France,  we
frequently talk about how direct and explicit Americans are.

Subtle? Hardly. Sophisticated? Not at all. But transparent
and direct—we all know this to be true.”
In this chapter, we’ll build on the Communicating scale
from the last chapter while adding an important twist. Some
cultures that are low-context and explicit may be cryptically
indirect with negative criticism, while other cultures that
speak  between  the  lines  may  be  explicit,  straight  talkers
when telling you what you did wrong. As we will see, the
French and the Americans are not the only cultures that
swap places on the Communicating and Evaluating scales.
The  Evaluating  scale  will  provide  you  with  important
insights into how to give effective performance appraisals
and negative feedback in different parts of the world. People
from  all  cultures  believe  in  “constructive  criticism.”  Yet
what  is  considered  constructive  in  one  culture  may  be
viewed as destructive in another. Getting negative feedback
right  can  motivate  your  employees  and  strengthen  your
reputation as a fair and professional colleague. Getting it
wrong  can  demoralize  an  entire  team  and  earn  you  an
undeserved  reputation  as  an  unfeeling  tyrant  or  a
hopelessly incompetent manager.
SPEAKING FRANKLY: A GIFT OR A SLAP IN THE
FACE?
One Thursday in mid-January, I had been holed up for six
hours  in  a  dark  conference  room  with  twelve  people
participating in my executive education program. It was a
group coaching day, and each executive had thirty minutes
to  describe  in  detail  a  cross-cultural  challenge  she  was
experiencing at work and to get feedback and suggestions
from the others at the table. The details of each person’s
situation were steeped in context, and I was beginning to
get a headache from concentrating on the ins and outs of
each challenge. We had made it through nine people and
were just beginning with Willem, number ten.

Willem was a rather shy manager from the Netherlands,
and, given his quiet persona, it struck me as unusual that he
was a sales director. He had grey, slightly disheveled hair
and a very friendly smile that made me think of a lovable St.
Bernard. Willem’s situation involved an American woman on
his team who would call into team meetings while driving
her children to school, a necessity given the six-hour time
difference between her home in the eastern United States
and  Rotterdam.  When  Willem  spoke  to  her  about  the
distraction of screaming kids in the background and asked
her to find a better solution, she took offense. “How can I fix
this relationship?” Willem asked the group.
Maarten,  the  other  Dutch  member  from  the  same
company who knew Willem well, quickly jumped in with his
perspective.  “You  are  inflexible  and  can  be  socially  ill-at-
ease. That makes it difficult for you to communicate with
your team,” he reflected. As Willem listened, I could see his
ears turning red (with embarrassment or anger? I wasn’t
sure), but that didn’t seem to bother Maarten, who calmly
continued  to  assess  Willem’s  weaknesses  in  front  of  the
entire  group.  Meanwhile,  the  other  participants—all
Americans—awkwardly  stared  at  their  feet.  Afterward,
several of them came up to me to say how inappropriate
they’d found Maarten’s comments.
For that evening, we’d planned a group dinner at a cozy
restaurant in the French countryside. Entering a little after
the others, I was startled to see Willem and Maarten sitting
together, eating peanuts, drinking champagne, and laughing
like  old  friends.  They  waved  me  over,  and  it  seemed
appropriate to comment, “I’m glad to see you together. I
was afraid you might not be speaking to each other after the
feedback  session  this  afternoon.”  Willem  stared  at  me  in
genuine  surprise.  So  I  clarified,  “You  looked  upset  when
Maarten was giving his feedback. But maybe I misread the
situation?”
Willem reflected, “Of course, I didn’t enjoy hearing those
things about myself. It doesn’t feel good to hear what I have

done poorly. But I so much appreciated that Maarten would
be transparent enough to give me that feedback honestly.
Feedback like that is a gift. Thanks for that, Maarten,” he
added with an appreciative smile.
I thought to myself, “This Dutch culture is . . . well . . .
different from my own.”
There  has  surely  been  a  time  when  you  were  on  the
receiving  end  of  criticism  that  was  just  too  direct.  You
finished an important project and after asking a colleague
for feedback, she told you it was “totally unprofessional.” Or
maybe a member of your team critiqued a grant proposal
you  wrote  by  calling  it  “ridiculously  ineffective.”  You
probably  found  this  incident  extremely  painful;  you  may
have  felt  this  colleague  was  arrogant,  and  it’s  likely  you
rejected  the  advice  offered.  You  may  have  developed  a
strong sense of distaste for this person that lingers to this
day.
You may have also experienced the opposite—feedback
that  was  far  too  indirect  at  a  time  when  an  honest
assessment of your work would have been very valuable.
Perhaps  you  asked  a  colleague  for  her  thoughts  about  a
project and were told, “Overall it’s good. Some parts are
great, and I particularly liked certain sections.” Maybe she
then noted that there were just a few very minor details that
you might consider adjusting a bit, using phrases like “no
big  deal”  and  “just  a  very  small  thought,”  that  left  you
thinking your work was nearly perfect.
If you later learned through the office grapevine that this
same colleague had ridiculed your project behind your back
as “the worst she’d seen in years,” you probably were not
very pleased. You likely felt a deep sense of betrayal leading
to a lasting feeling of mistrust toward your colleague, now
exposed in your eyes as a liar or a hypocrite.
Arrogance and dishonesty do exist, of course. There are
even times when people give offense deliberately in pursuit
of political objectives or in response to personal emotional
problems. But in some cases, painful incidents like the ones

just   described   are   the   result   of   cross-cultural
misunderstandings. Managers in different parts of the world
are  conditioned  to  give  feedback  in  drastically  different
ways.  The  Chinese  manager  learns  never  to  criticize  a
colleague  openly  or  in  front  of  others,  while  the  Dutch
manager  learns  always  to  be  honest  and  to  give  the
message straight. Americans are trained to wrap positive
messages  around  negative  ones,  while  the  French  are
trained  to  criticize  passionately  and  provide  positive
feedback sparingly.
Having a clear understanding of these differences and
strategies for navigating them is crucial for leaders of cross-
cultural teams.
UPGRADERS, DOWNGRADERS, AND THE ART
OF TRANSLATION
One way to begin gauging how a culture handles negative
feedback  is  by  listening  carefully  to  the  types  of  words
people use. More direct cultures tend to use what linguists
call upgraders,  words  preceding  or  following  negative
feedback  that  make  it  feel  stronger,  such  as absolutely,
totally,  or strongly:  “This  is absolutely  inappropriate,”  or
“This is totally unprofessional.”
By  contrast,  more  indirect  cultures  use  more
downgraders, words that soften the criticism, such as kind
of, sort of, a little, a bit, maybe, and slightly. Another type of
downgrader is a deliberate understatement, a sentence that
describes  a  feeling  the  speaker  experiences  strongly  in
terms that moderate the emotion—for example, saying “We
are  not  quite  there  yet”  when  you  really  mean  “This  is
nowhere close to complete,” or “This is just my opinion”
when you really mean “Anyone who considers this issue will
immediately agree.”
For many years I worked with Amihan Castillo, a lawyer
and business professor from the Philippines who’d come to
work  in  Europe  following  a  highly  successful  career  in

Manila.  Unfortunately,  her  opinions  went  unnoticed  when
working  with  our  European  team  because  she  was  so
careful to downgrade any criticisms she made of proposals
and  projects.  For  example,  if  we  were  preparing  a
descriptive brochure for a new executive program, Castillo
might  comment  on  the  cover  design  by  saying,  “Hmm,  I
thought we might possibly consider giving a bolder look to
the  brochure  cover  .  .  .  maybe?  What  do  you  think?”  A
European or an American would probably convey the same
feeling by saying, “The look of the cover isn’t working. I
suggest  we  try  this.”  Only  after  years  of  working  with
Castillo had I learned to interpret her messages correctly.
Of course, downgraders are used in every world culture,
but some cultures use them more than others. The British
are  masters  of  the  art,  with  the  result  that  their
communications often leave the rest of us quite bewildered.
Take the announcement made by British Airways pilot Eric
Moody in 1982, after flying through a cloud of volcanic ash
over Indonesia: “Good evening again, ladies and gentlemen.
This is Captain Eric Moody here. We have a small problem
in that all four engines have failed. We’re doing our utmost
to  get  them  going  and  I  trust  you’re  not  in  too  much
distress, and would the chief steward please come to the
flight deck?”
Fortunately, the plane was able to glide far enough to exit
the ash cloud and the engines were restarted, allowing the
aircraft to land safely at the Halim Perdanakusuma Airport
in  Jakarta  with  no  casualties.  Moody’s  recorded
announcement  has  since  been  widely  hailed  as  a  classic
example of understatement.
The “Anglo-Dutch Translation Guide” (Figure 2.1), which
has been anonymously circulating in various versions on the
Internet,  amusingly  illustrates  how  the  British  use
downgraders  and  the  resulting  confusion  this  can  create
among  listeners  from  another  culture  (in  this  case,  the
Dutch).
1
FIGURE 2.1. ANGLO-DUTCH TRANSLATION GUIDE

For  Marcus  Klopfer,  a  German  finance  director  at  the
management  consulting  firm  KPMG,  such  cross-cultural
misunderstandings are  no  laughing  matter.  A  soft-spoken
manager in his forties, Klopfer described how his failure to
decode a message from his British boss almost cost him his
job:

In  Germany,  we  typically  use  strong  words  when
complaining or criticizing in order to make sure the
message registers clearly and honestly. Of course, we
assume  others  will  do  the  same.  My  British  boss
during  a  one-on-one  “suggested  that  I  think  about”
doing something differently. So I took his suggestion: I
thought about it and decided not to do it. Little did I
know that his phrase was supposed to be interpreted
as “change your behavior right away or else.” And I
can  tell  you  I  was  pretty  surprised  when  my  boss
called  me  into  his  office  to  chew  me  out  for
insubordination!
I learned then and there that I needed to ignore all
of  the  soft  words  surrounding  the  message  when
listening to my British teammates and just analyze the
message as if it were given to me raw. Of course, the
other  lesson  was  to  consider  how  my  British  staff
might  interpret  my  messages,  which  I  had  been
delivering as “purely” as possible with no softeners
whatsoever. I realize now that when I give feedback in
my German way, I may actually use words that make
the  message  sound  as  strong  as  possible  without
thinking much about it. I’ve been surrounded by this
“pure” negative feedback since I was a child.
Now  Klopfer  makes  a  concerted  effort  to  soften  the
message  when  giving  negative  feedback  to  his  British
counterparts:
I try to start by sprinkling the ground with a few light
positive comments and words of appreciation. Then I
ease into the feedback with “a few small suggestions.”
As I’m giving the feedback, I add words like “minor”
or “possibly.” Then I wrap up by stating that “This is
just my opinion, for whatever it is worth,” and “You
can take it or leave it.”

The  elaborate  dance  is  quite  humorous  from  a
German’s  point  of  view.  We’d  be  much  more
comfortable just stating Das war absolut unverschämt
(“that was absolutely shameless”). But it certainly gets
my desired results!
The Evaluating scale (Figure 2.2) provides a bird’s-eye
view of just how direct people in different cultures are with
negative  criticism.  You  can  see  that  most  European
countries  fall  to  the  direct  side  of  the  scale,  with  the
Russians,  Dutch,  and  Germans  as  particularly  prone  to
offering frank criticism.

FIGURE 2.2. EVALUATING
American culture is in the middle of the scale; nearby are
the  British,  who  are  slightly  less  direct  with  negative
feedback  than  Americans.  Latin  Americans  and  South
Americans fall to the middle right, with Argentina as one of
the most direct of this cluster. Further right on the scale fall
most Asian countries, with the Indians as the most direct
with their criticism and the Thai, Cambodians, Indonesians,
and Japanese as the least direct.
Don’t  forget  cultural  relativity  when  you  look  at  the
scale. For example, the Chinese are to the right of the world
scale, but they are much more direct than the Japanese,
who  may  take  offense  at  their  forthright  feedback.  The
continental European cultures to the left or middle often
experience  Americans  as  strikingly  indirect,  while  Latin
Americans  perceive  the  same  Americans  as  blunt  and
brutally frank in their criticism style.

Note, too, that several countries have different positions
on  the  Evaluating  scale  from  those  they  occupy  on  the
Communicating scale. For this reason, you may be surprised
by  the  gap  between  our  stereotyped  assumptions  about
certain  countries  and  their  placement  on  the  Evaluating
scale. The explanation lies in the fact that stereotypes about
how directly people speak generally reflect their cultures’
position  on  the  Communicating  scale,  not  the  Evaluating
scale.  Thus,  the  French,  Spanish,  and  Russians  are
generally  stereotyped  as  being  indirect  communicators
because of their high-context, implicit communication style,
despite  the  fact  that  they  give  negative  feedback  more
directly. Americans are stereotyped as direct by most of the
world, yet when they give negative feedback they are less
direct than many European cultures.
One  high-context  country  on  the  direct  side  of  the
Evaluating  scale  is  Israel,  where  people  may  speak  with
copious subtext, yet give some of the most direct negative
feedback in the world. Once I was running a class for the
World Medical Association that included a large number of
Israeli doctors and a group of doctors from Singapore. One
of the Singaporean doctors, a small woman in her fifties,
protested  vociferously  when  she  saw  the  far  left-hand
positioning of Israel on the Evaluating scale. “I don’t see
how Israel can be positioned as so direct! We have been
with our Israeli friends here all week and they are good,
kind people!” From her Singaporean perspective being good
was correlated with being diplomatic and being very direct
was correlated with not being kind.
In response, one of the Israeli doctors declared, “I don’t
see what that has to do with it. Honesty and directness are a
great virtues. The position is correct, and I am very proud of
it.” Israel is one of several cultures that value both high-
context communication and direct negative feedback.
Mapping  the  Communicating  scale  against  the
Evaluating  scale  gives  us  four  quadrants,  as  shown  in
Figure 2.3: low-context and direct with negative feedback;

low-context  and  indirect  with  negative  feedback;  high-
context and direct with negative feedback; and high-context
and indirect with negative feedback. Particular cultures can
be found in each of these quadrants, and there are differing
strategies you’ll find effective for dealing with people from
each.
LOW-CONTEXT AND DIRECT NEGATIVE
FEEDBACK
Whether  they’re  considered  blunt,  rude,  and  offensive  or
honest, transparent, and frank, these cultures are perceived
as  direct  by  all  other  world  populations.  Cultures  in  this
quadrant (the quadrant labeled A in Figure 2.3) value low-
context, explicit communication as well as direct negative
feedback.  The  natural  coherence  of  these  two  positions
makes communication from people in this quadrant fairly
easy to decode. Take any messages they send literally and
understand that it is not intended to be offensive but rather
as a simple sign of honesty, transparency, and respect for
your own professionalism.
We already met Willem and Maarten who come from the
Netherlands,  a  solidly  quadrant  A  culture.  Willem
experienced Maarten’s explicit and direct negative feedback
to be not just appropriate, but a real gift. What if Willem
and Maarten were your colleagues? What is an appropriate
way to respond to their direct style of offering criticism?

FIGURE 2.3.
One rule for working with cultures that are more direct
than yours on the Evaluating scale: Don’t try to do it like
them. Even in the countries farthest to the direct side of the
Evaluating scale, it is still quite possible to be too direct. If
you don’t understand the subtle rules that separate what’s
appropriately  frank  from  what  is  callously  insensitive  in
Dutch culture, then leave it to someone from that culture to
speak directly. If you try to do it like them, you run the risk

of getting it wrong, going too far, and making unintended
enemies.
I witnessed this type of mistake when working with a
Korean  manager  named  Kwang  Young-Su  who  had  been
living in the Netherlands for six years. A friendly, quiet man
in his early forties, Kwang had a wide grin and soft laugh
that  we  heard  frequently.  But  Kwang’s  colleagues  had
complained to me that they found him so aggressive and
angry that they were practically unable to work with him. I
wondered  how  this  could  be  so,  until  Kwang  himself
explained the situation:
The Dutch culture is very direct, and we Koreans do
not like to give direct negative feedback. So when I
first came to the Netherlands, I was shocked at how
rude and arrogant the Dutch are with their criticism.
When they don’t like something, they tell you bluntly
to your face. I spoke to another Korean friend who has
been in the Netherlands for a while, and he told me
that the only way to handle this is to give it right back
to them. Now I try to be just as blunt with them as
they are with me.
Unfortunately, not understanding the subtleties of what
was appropriate and what was not, Kwang had gone too far,
missing  the  mark  entirely.  He  alienated  his  colleagues,
sabotaged his relationships, and built up a reputation as an
angry aggressor. So much for adaptability.
Don’t make the same mistake as Kwang. When you are
working with cultures from quadrant A, accept their direct
criticism in a positive manner. It is not meant to offend you.
But don’t take the risk of trying to do it like them. One small
upgrader at a time may be all you can risk without tipping
over to the side of being offensive or inappropriate.

HIGH-CONTEXT AND DIRECT NEGATIVE
FEEDBACK
Quadrant B (see page 72) is populated with those puzzlingly
complex cultures that have finessed the ability to speak and
listen between the lines yet give negative feedback that is
sharp  and  direct.  Russians,  for  example,  often  pass
messages between the lines, but when it comes to criticism
they have a directness that can startle their international
colleagues.
The first time I traveled to Russia a Russian friend gave
me a short little book that she referred to as “The Russian
Handbook.”
2
 Paging through the book during my flight, I
was amused to read:
If you are walking through the street without a jacket,
little old Russian ladies may stop and chastise you for
poor judgment. . . . In Russia there is no reticence
about expressing your negative criticism openly. For
instance, if you are displeased with the service in a
shop or restaurant you can tell the shop assistant or
waiter exactly what you think of him, his relatives, his
in-laws, his habits, and his sexual bias.
I thought about this observation a few weeks later when I
received a call from a British colleague, Sandi Carlson. She
explained to me that a young Russian woman named Anna
Golov had recently joined her team and was upsetting a lot
of people whose help she needed to get her job done. “I’m
calling  you,  Erin,”  she  said,  “because  I  wondered  if  the
problem  might  be  cultural.  This  is  the  fourth  Russian
coordinator we have had in the group, and with three of
them there were similar types of complaints about harsh
criticism or what has been perceived as speaking to others
inconsiderately.”
A few days later, I had the opportunity to witness the
problem in action. While I prepared to teach one morning,

Golov  herself  was  in  the  room  with  me  setting  up  the
classroom. I was going through stacks of handouts, counting
pages  to  make  sure  we  had  enough  photocopies,  while
Golov was carefully checking the IT equipment, which, to
our annoyance, was not working properly. I appreciated the
fact that she was handling the problem with such tenacity
and that I did not have to get involved. The fact that she was
humming quietly while she worked gave me an extra sense
of relaxed assurance.
But then I heard Golov on the phone with someone in the
IT department. “I’ve called IT three times this week, and
every time you are slow to get here and the solution doesn’t
last,” she complained. “The solutions you have given me are
entirely  unacceptable.”  Golov  went  on  scolding  the  IT
manager, each sentence a bit harsher than the one before. I
held my breath. Was she going to tell him how she felt about
his sexual bias? Thankfully not at that moment.
Later, Carlson asked me, as the resident cross-cultural
specialist, whether I would accompany her when she spoke
with  Golov  about  the  problem.  I  was  not  thrilled  at  the
request. I certainly did not look forward to witnessing Golov
learn  what  her  new  colleagues  were  saying  about  her
behind her back. But at Carlson’s insistence, I agreed.
We met in Carlson’s office, and she tried to explain the
reputation  that  Golov  had  unknowingly  developed  across
the campus, citing specific complaints not just from the IT
department  but  also  from  the  photocopying  staff.  Golov
shifted uncomfortably in her chair while Carlson explained
that she had wondered whether the problem was cultural.
At first Anna did not really understand the feedback. She
protested, “But we Russians are very subtle communicators.
We use irony and subtext. You British and Americans speak
so transparently.”
“Yes,”  I  interjected.  “But  if  a  Russian  has  negative
feedback  to  give,  it  seems  that  often  that  feedback  is
perceived  to  be  harsh  or  direct  to  people  from  other
cultures. Does that make sense?”

“Yes, well . . . that depends who we are speaking with, of
course. One point is that we tend to be a very hierarchical
culture. If you are a boss speaking to your subordinate, you
may be very frank. And if you are a subordinate speaking to
your boss, you had better be very diplomatic with criticism.”
Carlson  smiled,  perhaps  realizing  why  she  had  never
personally experienced any of Golov’s frankness.
Golov went on:
If we are speaking with strangers, we often speak very
forcefully. This is true. These IT guys, I don’t know
them. They are the voices of strangers on the other
end  of  the  phone.  Under  Communism,  the  stranger
was the enemy. We didn’t know who we could trust,
who would turn us in to the authorities, who would
betray us. So we kept strangers at a forceful distance.
Maybe I brought a little too much of my Russian-ness
into the job without realizing it.
I noticed that Golov was now beginning to laugh a little
as she continued to consider the situation. “We are also very
direct  with  people  we  are  close  to,”  she  conceded
reflectively. “My British friends here complain that I voice
my opinions so strongly, while I feel like I never know how
they really feel about the situation. I am always saying: ‘But
how do you feel about it?’ And they are always responding:
‘Why are you always judging everything?’!”
“Now that I’m aware of this,” Golov concluded, “I’ll be
more careful when I communicate dissatisfaction.”
The French have a saying, “Quand on connait sa maladie,
on est à moitié guéri”—“When you know your sickness, you
are  halfway  cured.”  It  applies  to  most  cross-cultural
confusions.  Just  building  your  own  awareness  and  the
awareness  of  your  team  goes  a  long  way  to  improving
collaboration.  Now  that  Carlson  is  aware  of  the  cultural
tendencies impacting the situation, she can talk to Golov
and her team about it, and Golov can take steps to give less

direct  criticism  and  replace  some  of  her  upgraders  with
downgraders. When it comes to the Evaluating scale, a few
simple words can make all the difference.
LOW-CONTEXT AND INDIRECT NEGATIVE
FEEDBACK
Combining extreme low-context communication with a mid-
indirect approach to giving negative feedback, the American
evaluating style (quadrant C in Figure 2.3, page 72) is so
specific, unique, and often baffling to the rest of the world
that it deserves a few paragraphs to itself.
An  explicit,  low-context  communication  style  gives
Americans the reputation of lacking subtlety. Leave it to the
Americans to point out the elephant in the room when the
rest of us were working through our interpersonal issues
nicely without calling attention to it. This means that those
in quadrants A and B are often surprised to find Americans
softening negative criticism with positive messages. Before
moving  to  France,  having  been  raised,  educated,  and
employed in the United States, I believed that giving three
positives  for  every  negative  and  beginning  a  feedback
session  with  the  words  of  explicit  appreciation  before
discussing what  needs  to  be  improved  were  universally
effective techniques. If they worked well in America, then
surely they should work just as well in France, Brazil, China
and, well, everywhere.
But after living in Europe for a while I learned to see this
style from a completely different perspective. To the French,
Spanish, Russians, Dutch, and Germans, the American mode
of  giving  feedback  comes  across  as  false  and  confusing.
Willem, who we met at the beginning of the chapter and
who works frequently with Americans, told me:
To  a  Dutchman,  it  is  all  a  lot  of  hogwash.  All  that
positive feedback just strikes us as fake and not in the
least bit motivating. I was on a conference call with an

American group yesterday, and the organizer began,
“I am absolutely thrilled to be with you this morning.”
Only  an  American  would  begin  a  meeting  like  this.
Let’s face it, everyone in the room knows that she is
not truly, honestly thrilled. Thrilled to win the lottery—
yes. Thrilled to find out that you have won a free trip
to the Caribbean—yes. Thrilled to be the leader of a
conference call—highly doubtful.
When   my   American   colleagues   begin   a
communication  with  all  of  their  “excellents”  and
“greats,”  it  feels  so  exaggerated  that  I  find  it
demeaning. We are adults, here to do our jobs and to
do  them  well.  We  don’t  need  our  colleagues  to  be
cheerleaders.
Willem’s colleague Maarten added:
The problem is that we can’t tell when the feedback is
supposed to register to us as excellent, okay, or really
poor. For a Dutchman, the word “excellent” is saved
for a rare occasion and “okay” is . . . well, neutral. But
with the Americans, the grid is different. “Excellent”
is used all the time. “Okay” seems to mean “not okay.”
“Good”  is  only  a  mild  compliment.  And  when  the
message was intended to be bad, you can pretty much
assume  that,  if  an  American  is  speaking  and  the
listener is Dutch, the real meaning of the message will
be lost all together.
The same difference is reflected in the ways children are
treated  in  schools.  My  children  are  in  the  French  school
system during the academic year and spend the summer in
American academic programs in the Minneapolis area. In
the  United  States,  my  eight-year-old  son,  Ethan,  gets  his
homework assignments back covered with gold stars and
comments  like  “Keep  it  up!”  “Excellent  work!”  and,  at
worst, “Almost there . . . give it another try!” But studying in

Madame Durand’s class requires thicker skin. After a recent
Monday morning spelling test, Ethan’s notebook page was
covered sorrowfully in red lines and fat Xs, along with seven
simple words from Madame Durand: “8 errors. Skills not
acquired. Apply yourself!”
Ooooof! That hurts a mom from Minnesota. What about
“Nice  effort!”  or  “Don’t  give  up!”  or  “You’ll  get  it  next
time”? And I should note that Madame Durand is known as
the  least  “sévère,”  that  is,  the  softest  of  the  teachers  at
Ethan’s school.
At first, I worried that Ethan might begin to hate school,
dislike his teacher, become discouraged, or just plain stop
trying.  But  to  the  surprise  of  his  American  mom,  he  is
coming to interpret negative feedback as the French would.
The scathing comments strike him as routine, while a rare
“TB”  (très  bien—very  good)  leaves  a  deeply  positive
impression on his young psyche.
However,  adapting  to  quadrant  C  can  be  quite
challenging  for  those  from  other  cultures.  Frenchwoman
Sabine  Dulac  recalls  an  experience  that  happened  soon
after her move to Chicago:
Along with a group of American colleagues, I was on a
committee which was organizing a big conference to
market our new product line to current clients. The
conference was a disaster. There was a horrible icy
rainstorm that morning, which meant low attendance.
The  keynote  speaker  was  a  bore.  The  food  was
horrible.
Afterward  the  committee  met  to  debrief  the
conference. Everyone knew the conference had been a
disastrous failure, but when the team leader asked for
feedback,  each  committee  member  started  by
mentioning something good about the conference: the
booths  had  been  well  organized,  the  buses  to  the
restaurant were on time, . . . before moving on to the
calamities. I was stunned. I actually had to hold my

jaw  closed  while  I  watched  my  colleagues  detailing
positive example after positive example in describing
a situation that was so clearly anything but.
When it was my turn, I couldn’t take it anymore—I
just  launched  right  in.  “It  was  one  disappointment
after another,” I began. “The keynote was uninspiring,
the food was almost inedible, the breakout sessions
were boring . . . ,” but as I spoke I saw the Americans
around me staring at me saucer-eyed and silent. Did I
have food on my face, I wondered?
People  in  Dulac’s  position  can  follow  a  few  simple
strategies  to  work  more  effectively  with  people  from
quadrant C (that is, Americans, British, and Canadians).
First, when providing an evaluation, be explicit and low-
context with both positive and negative feedback. But don’t
launch  into  the  negatives  until  you  have  also  explicitly
stated something that you appreciate about the person or
the situation. The positive comments should be honest and
stated in a detailed, explicit manner.
When I gave Dulac this suggestion, her first reaction was
to  feel  that  I  was  asking  her  to  lie.  “If  I  thought  the
conference was a total disaster, isn’t it dishonest to not say
what I think?”
But  I  pressed  her:  Wasn’t  there  anything  honest  and
positive  that  she  could  say  about  the  conference?  Dulac
considered the question and came up with a couple of ideas.
After I explained the differing attitudes of Americans toward
the “proper” way of delivering feedback, Dulac understood
the kind of adjustment she needed to make:
If  I  were  in  that  situation  again,  I  might  start  by
talking about how much we learned from the event
about what to do differently next time. I might also
mention how impressed I was that there were no IT
snafus, thanks to the logistical staff led by the always
tenacious and hardworking Marion. And then, when I

get to the disaster part, I might use a downgrader. “It
was a bit of a disaster” might go over better than “a
total disaster” the next time around.
Second, try, over time, to be balanced in the amount of
positive and negative feedback you give. For example, if you
notice  something  positive  your  colleague  has  done  on
Monday,  say  it  there  and  then  with  explicit,  open
appreciation. Then, on Tuesday, when you need to severely
criticize the same colleague’s disappointing proposal before
it is sent to the client, your comments will be more likely to
be heard and considered rather than rejected out of hand.
Third, frame your behavior in cultural terms. Talk about
the  cultural  differences  that  explain  your  communication
style. If possible, show appreciation for the other culture
while  laughing  humbly  at  your  own.  Someone  in  Dulac’s
position might say, “In the U.S., you are so good at openly
appreciating one another. In France, we aren’t in the habit
of voicing positive feedback. We might think it, but we don’t
say it!”
To  those  she  works  with  frequently,  Dulac  might  also
explain her natural feedback style: “When I say ‘okay,’ you
should hear ‘very good.’ And when I say ‘good,’ you should
hear ‘excellent.’”
Framing comments like these builds awareness among
people on both sides of the table and may lead to useful
discussions about other cultural misunderstandings.
HIGH-CONTEXT AND INDIRECT NEGATIVE
FEEDBACK
Among  people  from  cultures  in  quadrant  D  as  shown  on
page 72,  negative  feedback  is  generally  soft,  subtle,  and
implicit. Turn your head too quickly and you might miss the
negative message altogether. Whereas in American culture
you might give negative feedback in public by veiling it in a
joking  or  friendly  manner,  in  quadrant  D  this  would  be

unacceptable;  any  negative  feedback  should  be  given  in
private,  regardless  of  how  much  humor  or  good-natured
ribbing you wrap around it.
Charlie  Hammer,  an  American  manager  in  the  textile
industry  living  and  working  in  Mexico  City,  offers  this
example:
I  was  really  taken  aback  when  one  of  my  Mexican
employees gave me his resignation. I had given him
some negative feedback in a meeting, but I did it in a
way that sounded to me almost like a joke. The mood
in the room was light, and after giving the feedback I
quickly  moved  on.  I  felt  it  was  no  big  deal  and  I
thought everything was fine. But apparently it was a
big deal to him. I learned later from one of the team
members that I had seriously insulted him by giving
this feedback in front of the team. He felt humiliated
and  worried  that  he  was  going  to  get  fired,  so  he
decided  it  would  be  better  to  quit  first.  It  took  me
completely by surprise.
As this situation suggests, the first simple strategy for
giving  negative  feedback  to  someone  from  a  culture  in
quadrant D is Don’t give feedback to an individual in front
of a group. This rule applies even if you use a lot of soft,
cozy downgraders or rely on a joke to lighten the mood.
And, yes, it applies to positive feedback as well. In many
cultures that are less individualistic than the United States,
it may be embarrassing to be singled out for positive praise
in  front  of  others.  Give  your  individual  feedback  to  the
individual and give only group feedback to the group.
A second powerful tool for giving feedback to those from
quadrant  D—especially  those  from  Asian  cultures—is  the
technique  of blurring  the  message.  People  from  most
Western cultures don’t like the idea of making a message
blurry. We like our messages short, crisp, and, above all,
transparent. But blurriness can be highly effective in many

Asian cultures if it is used skillfully and appropriately, as I
discovered early in my career.
I had been working as a consultant for an international
training firm for about a year. One of my programs was a
custom-designed  international  leadership  course  for  the
large Swiss-headquartered food multinational Nestlé. I co-
taught  the  program  with  Budi,  an  Indonesian  consultant
who had been with the company for decades and was close
to  the  founders.  He  had  a  reputation  as  a  highly  skilled
trainer,  but  over  the  last  couple  of  years  his  classroom
performance  had  been  declining  dramatically,  much  to
everyone’s chagrin.
Let me also add that it was politically useful to have Budi
on your side. As someone very well connected within the
organization, he could open many doors if he liked you, and
he had done so for many of his favored colleagues in the
past.
With all of this in mind, I winced when my contact at
Nestlé gave me quite clear feedback that they wanted to
eliminate two of the three sessions that Budi taught in the
program based on mediocre evaluation ratings.
I went home that evening with a knot in my stomach.
When Budi heard that I was replacing his sessions with two
sessions led by a more junior consultant, he was likely to be
hurt  and  embarrassed.  To  complicate  an  already  difficult
situation, Budi comes from one of the most indirect cultures
in the world, where giving negative feedback to someone
older  and  more  experienced  is  particularly  difficult  and
painful. I didn’t sleep well that night.
The next morning in an anxious stupor I set up a lunch
with a longtime Indonesian colleague and friend and asked
her  for  advice.  Thankfully,  Aini  introduced  me  to  some
strategies for blurring the message.
The first strategy: Give the feedback slowly, over a period
of time, so that it gradually sinks in. “In the West,” Aini said,
“you learn that feedback should be given right here, right
now.  In  most  Asian  societies,  it  is  best  to  give  feedback

gradually.  This  does  not  mean  that  you  beat  the  direct
message in periodically, again and again. Rather it means
that you make small references to the changes that need to
be made gently, gradually building a clear picture as to what
should be done differently.”
With Aini’s guidance, I composed a first e-mail to Budi,
alluding  to  the  fact  that  I  would  need  to  redesign  the
program  in  future  months  based  on  the  feedback  of  the
participants  and  that  this  would  have  an  impact  on  his
sessions. I mentioned that I needed to focus more on topic
X, which meant we would have less time for topic Y. Budi
responded  kindly,  saying  that  he  would  be  pleased  to
discuss it with me when he was in Paris later that month.
Budi and I spoke by phone the week before his visit to
Paris, and I mentioned that I would be sending the most
recent client feedback so that he could see it before our
meeting. I indicated that the program would be reworked
entirely  and  that  I  would  also  be  inviting  our  junior
colleague to teach in some sessions. Bit by bit, Budi was
beginning to get the picture.
This led to Aini’s second strategy: Use food and drink to
blur  an  unpleasant  message.  Aini  told  me,  “If  I  have  to
provide criticism to someone on my staff, I am not going to
call them into my office. If I do, I know that they are going
to be listening to my message with all of their senses—and
any  message  I  provide  will  be  greatly  amplified  in  their
minds. Instead, I might invite them out to lunch. Once we
are relaxed, this is a good time to give feedback. We don’t
make reference to it in the office the next day or the next
week, but the feedback has been passed and the receiver is
now able to take action without humiliation or breaking the
harmony  between  the  two  parties.  In  Japan,  Thailand,
Korea, China, or Indonesia, the same strategy applies.”
This would be an easy rule to apply. I told Budi that when
he was in Paris I would love to have lunch with him at my
favorite new restaurant near the Champs-Elysées, where I
knew he would love the black squid pasta.

Aini’s third and final piece of strategy baffled me at first.
She urged me: Say the good and leave out the bad. Was Aini
suggesting that I could pass the negative message without
saying it at all? Via telepathy?
Aini explained by using an example:
A while back, one of my Indonesian colleagues sent
me a set of four documents to read and review. The
last two documents he must have finished in a hurry,
because they were very sloppy in comparison to the
first two. When he called to ask for my reaction, I told
him that the first two papers were excellent. I focused
on these documents only, outlining why they were so
effective.  I  didn’t  need  to  mention  the  sloppy
documents, which would have been uncomfortable for
both of us. He got the message clearly, and I didn’t
even need to bring up the negative aspects.
Well, I understood the concept, although the execution
for someone from Two Harbors, Minnesota, was not easy.
The next week, I met Budi at the Italian bistro I had told
him  about.  After  forty-five  minutes  of  catching  up  over
delicious artichoke hearts and sun-dried tomato antipasti,
the moment of truth had come. “Say the good, leave out the
bad,” I reminded myself, easing gently into the subject, my
heart beating just a little faster than normal.
“Budi,”  I  began,  “your  first  session  is  very  much
appreciated.  Although  I  am  redesigning  the  program,  I
definitely  do  not  want  to  touch  this  session.  In  fact,  I
thought I might build on your first session by working with
our junior colleague on Tuesday morning’s session.”
Budi replied, “That sounds great, Erin! I much prefer to
have a shorter amount of presentation time with a really big
impact. And if that works for the program, it works for me.”
Hallelujah! Not a moment of discomfort! I had somehow
managed  to  pass  the  message  without  ever  giving  the
criticism explicitly. Thank you, Aini!

Here is one final warning for anyone working with people
from a quadrant D culture. While indirect feedback is the
norm, it is quite possible for a boss to give scathing negative
feedback to an employee while remaining entirely within the
realm  of  the  appropriate.  In  these  cases,  the  strongly
hierarchical tendencies found in many quadrant D cultures
trump  their  indirect  feedback  patterns.  Thus,  it’s  not
unheard  of  for  a  boss  in  Korea  to  berate  an  employee
publicly or for an Indian boss to bark criticism to their staff
in  a  way  that  shocks  and  silences  any  Europeans  or
Americans within earshot.
But  you,  the  foreigner,  should  not  try  this.  For  your
purposes, whether you are the mail boy, the manager, or the
owner of the company, stick to the blurring and leave the
direct downward vertical feedback to those who call that
country home.
WHAT DOES IT MEAN TO BE POLITE?
Maarten, the Dutch manager we met earlier, explained to
me  once,  “In  the  Netherlands,  we  give  feedback  very
directly,  but  we  are  always  polite.”  I  love  this  comment,
because  a  Dutch  person’s  feedback  can  indeed  be  both
brutally  honest  yet  delightfully  polite—but  only  if  the
recipient is Dutch. If you happen to come from one of the
195  or  so  societies  in  the  world  that  like  their  negative
feedback a bit less direct than in the Netherlands, you may
feel  that  Maarten’s  “politeness”  is  downright  insulting,
offensive, and yes, rude.
Politeness is in the eye of the beholder. Giving feedback—
especially when it’s negative—is a sensitive business at the
best  of  times.  It  can  be  made  a  lot  worse  if  the  person
receiving the feedback believes he or she has been spoken
to  rudely.  Precisely  what constitutes  rudeness,  however,
varies enormously from place to place.
The sophisticated global manager learns how to adapt—
to alter his behavior a bit, to practice humility, to test the

waters before speaking up, to assume goodwill on the part
of others, and to invest time and energy in building good
relationships. With a little luck and skill, it’s possible to be
perceived as equally polite in Amsterdam, Jakarta, Moscow,
Buenos Aires, Paris, or Two Harbors, Minnesota.

3
Why Versus How
The Art of Persuasion in a
Multicultural World
The art of persuasion is one of the most crucial business
skills. Without the ability to persuade others to support your
ideas, you won’t be able to attract the support you need to
turn those ideas into realities. And though most people are
unaware of it, the ways you seek to persuade others and the
kinds of arguments you find persuasive are deeply rooted in
your  culture’s  philosophical,  religious,  and  educational
assumptions and attitudes. Far from being universal, then,
the art of persuasion is one that is profoundly culture-based.
That was the hard lesson learned by Kara Williams, an
American engineer newly working as a research manager
for a German firm in the automotive industry. As one of the
leading  experts  in  her  field  Williams  had  extensive
experience  presenting  recommendations  and  influencing
her  American  colleagues  to  follow  her  ideas.  But  when
Williams began working in a German environment she didn’t
realize  that  being  persuasive  would  require  a  different

approach. “When I think back to my first presentation to my
new German bosses, I wish I had understood the difference
and hadn’t let their feedback get under my skin. If I had
held  my  cool  I  might  have  been  able  to  salvage  the
situation.”
Williams has faced many challenges in her career. Before
taking  the  job  with  the  German  firm,  she  worked  for  an
Australian  company  from  her  home  office  in  Boston,
traveling  frequently  to  the  Sydney  headquarters  to  give
presentations and offer advice. “A lot of my job relies on my
ability to sell my ideas and influence my internal clients to
take the best path,” she explains. “I’m good at what I do,
but  I  hate  constant  long-distance  travel.  When  offered  a
similar  position  working  for  a  German  auto  supplier,  I
jumped at the opportunity for shorter travel distances.”
Williams’s first project was providing technical advice on
how to reduce carbon emissions from one of the group’s
“green” car models. After visiting several automotive plants,
observing  the  systems  and  processes  there,  and  meeting
with dozens of experts and end users, Williams developed a
set  of  recommendations  that  she  felt  would  meet  the
company’s strategic and budgetary goals. She traveled to
Munich  to  give  a  one-hour  presentation  to  the  decision
makers—a group of German directors.
“It  was  my  first  internal  presentation,  and  its  success
would be important for my reputation,” Williams recalls. In
preparation  for  the  meeting  Williams  thought  carefully
about  how  to  give  the  most  persuasive  presentation,
practicing her arguments, anticipating questions that might
arise, and preparing responses to those questions.
Williams delivered her presentation in a small auditorium
with the directors seated in rows of upholstered chairs. She
began by getting right to the point, explaining the strategies
she would recommend based on her findings. But before she
had finished with the first slide, one of the directors raised
his  hand  and  protested,  “How  did  you  get  to  these
conclusions? You are giving us your recommendations, but I

don’t understand how you got here. How many people did
you interview? What questions did you ask?”
Then another director jumped in: “Please explain what
methodology you used for analyzing your data and how that
led you to come to these findings.”
“I  was  taken  aback,”  Williams  remembers.  “I  assured
them  that  the  methodology  behind  my  recommendations
was sound, but the questions and challenges continued. The
more they questioned me, the more I got the feeling that
they  were  attacking  my  credibility,  which  puzzled  and
annoyed me. I have a Ph.D. in engineering and expertise
that  is  widely  acknowledged.  Their  effort  to  test  my
conclusions,  I  felt,  showed  a  real  lack  of  respect.  What
arrogance to think that they would be better able to judge
than I am!”
Williams reacted defensively, and the presentation went
downhill from there. “I kick myself now for having allowed
their approach to derail my point,” she says. “Needless to
say, they did not approve my recommendations, and three
months of research time went down the drain.”
The stone wall Williams ran into illustrates the hard truth
that our ability to persuade others depends not simply on
the  strength  of  our  message  but  on  how  we  build  our
arguments and the persuasive techniques we employ.
Jens  Hupert  is  a  German  director  at  the  company
Williams worked for. Having lived in the United States for
many  years,  he  had  experienced  similar  failures  at
persuading others, though the cultural disconnect ran in the
opposite direction. Hupert recalled the problems he’d had
the first few times he tried to make a persuasive argument
before a group of his American colleagues. He’d carefully
launched his presentation by laying the foundation for his
conclusions, setting the parameters, outlining his data and
his  methodology,  and  explaining  the  premise  of  his
argument. He was taken aback when his American boss told
him, “In your next presentation, get right to the point. You

lost their attention before you even got to the important
part.”
Hupert  was  unsure.  “These  are  intelligent  people,”  he
thought. “Why would they swallow my argument if I haven’t
built it carefully for them from the ground up?”
The  opposing  reactions  that  Williams  and  Hupert
received  reflect  the  cultural  differences  between  German
and American styles of persuasion. The approach taken by
the Germans is based on a specific style of reasoning that is
deeply ingrained in the cultural psyche. Hupert explains:
In  Germany,  we  try  to  understand  the  theoretical
concept before adapting it to the practical situation.
To understand something, we first want to analyze all
of the conceptual data before coming to a conclusion.
When  colleagues  from  cultures  like  the  U.S.  or  the
U.K. make presentations to us, we don’t realize that
they were taught to think differently from us. So when
they   begin   by   presenting   conclusions   and
recommendations without setting up the parameters
and how they got to those conclusions, it can actually
shock us. We may feel insulted. Do they think we are
stupid—that we will just swallow anything? Or we may
question whether their decision was well thought out.
This reaction is based on our deep-seated belief that
you cannot come to a conclusion without first defining
the parameters.
Hupert’s  time  in  the  United  States  taught  him  that
Americans have a very different approach. They focus on
practicalities  rather  than  theory,  so  they  are  much  more
likely to begin with their recommendations. Unfortunately,
this  reasoning  method  can  backfire when  making
presentations to an audience whose method of thinking is
the opposite—as Kara Williams discovered.

TWO STYLES OF REASONING: PRINCIPLES-
FIRST VERSUS APPLICATIONS-FIRST
Principles-first  reasoning  (sometimes  referred  to  as
deductive  reasoning)  derives  conclusions  or  facts  from
general principles or concepts. For example, we may start
with a general principle like “All men are mortal.” Then we
move to a more specific example: “Justin Bieber is a man.”
This  leads  us  to  the  conclusion,  “Justin  Bieber  will,
eventually,  die.”  Similarly,  we  may  start  with  the  general
principle “Everything made of copper conducts electricity.”
Then  we  show  that  the  old  statue  of  a  leprechaun  your
grandmother left you is 100 percent copper. Based on these
points,  we  can  arrive  at  the  conclusion,  “Your
grandmother’s  statue  will  conduct  electricity.”  In  both
examples, we started with the general principle and moved
from it to a practical conclusion.
On  the  other  hand,  with applications-first  reasoning
(sometimes called inductive reasoning), general conclusions
are reached based on a pattern of factual observations from
the real world. For example, if you travel to my hometown in
Minnesota one hundred times during January and February,
and  you  observe  every  visit  that  the  temperature  is
considerably below zero, you will conclude that Minnesota
winters are cold (and that a winter visit to Minnesota calls
for a warm coat as well as a scarf, wool hat, gloves, and ear
warmers).  In  this  case,  you  observe  data  from  the  real
world, and, based on these empirical observations, you draw
broader conclusions.
Most  people  are  capable  of  practicing  both  principles-
first  and  applications-first  reasoning.  But  your  habitual
pattern  of  reasoning is  heavily  influenced  by  the  kind  of
thinking emphasized in your culture’s educational structure.
As a result, you can quickly run into problems when working
with people who are most accustomed to other modes of
reasoning.
Take math class as an example. In a course using the
applications-first  method,  you  first  learn  the  formula  and

practice applying it. After seeing how this formula leads to
the  right  answer  again  and  again,  you  then  move  on  to
understand the concept or principle underpinning it. This
means you may spend 80 percent of your time focusing on
the concrete tool and how to apply it and only 20 percent of
your  time  considering  its  conceptual  or  theoretical
explanation. School systems in Anglo-Saxon countries tend
to emphasize this method of teaching.
By  contrast,  in  a  principles-first  math  class,  you  first
prove the general principle, and only then use it to develop
a concrete formula that can be applied to various problems.
As a French manager once told me, “We had to calculate the
value of pi as a class before we used pi in a formula.” In this
kind of math class, you may spend 80 percent of your time
focusing  on  the  concepts  or  theories  underpinning  the
general mathematical principles and only 20 percent of your
time applying those principles to concrete problems. School
systems in Latin Europe (France, Italy, Spain, Portugal), the
Germanic countries (Germany, Austria), and Latin America
(Mexico, Brazil, Argentina) tend to emphasize this method
of teaching.
I felt the full force of the applications-first method when I
studied Russian in my American high school. We walked into
Mr.  Tarasov’s  class  on  the  first  day  of  school,  and  he
immediately  fired  questions  at  us  in  Russian.  We  didn’t
understand a thing. But gradually we started to understand,
and, after a few lessons, we began to speak, putting words
together any which way we could. Then, with Mr. Tarasov’s
guidance, we began using sentences whose structure we did
not  understand  to  create  a  conceptual  grammatical
framework.
By contrast, in a principles-first language class, learning
starts  with  understanding  the  grammatical  principles
underpinning the language structure. Once you have a solid
initial grasp of the grammar and vocabulary, you begin to
practice using the language. This is the way my husband
learned  English  in  his  French  school,  and  ironically,  his

knowledge  of  English  grammar  is  far  superior  to  that  of
many Americans. The disadvantage is that students spend
less  time  practicing  the  language,  which  may  mean  they
write it better than they speak it.
In  business,  as  in  school,  people  from  principles-first
cultures generally want to understand the why behind their
boss’s  request  before  they  move  to  action.  Meanwhile,
applications-first learners tend to focus less on the why and
more  on  the how.  One  of  the  most  common  frustrations
among French employees with American bosses is that the
American tells them what to do without explaining why they
need to do it. From the French perspective, this can feel
demotivating,  even  disrespectful.  By  contrast,  American
bosses  may  feel  that  French  workers  are  uncooperative
because, instead of acting quickly, they always ask “Why?”
and are not ready to act until they have received a suitable
response.
COUNTRY POSITIONS ON THE PERSUADING
SCALE
In general, Anglo-Saxon cultures like the United States, the
United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, and New Zealand tend
to fall to the far right on the Persuading scale (see Figure
3.1), where applications-first cultures are clustered. As we
move across the scale there’s a Nordic cluster, where we
find Scandinavia and the Netherlands. Latin American and
Germanic  cultures  are  considerably  more  principles-first
than the United States but much less so than their Latin
European cousins, so we put them around the middle of the
scale. France, Russia, and Belgium appear on the principles-
first side of the scale.

FIGURE 3.1. PERSUADING
As  always,  remember  the  importance  of  cultural
relativity. Where a given country falls on the scale matters
less than where two cultures fall relative to one another.
The British tilt rather far toward the applications-first end of
the  scale.  But  Yasser  Tawfik,  an  Egyptian  manager  for
Merck Pharmaceuticals, has this to say about his experience
of  studying  in  both  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United
States:
In the U.K., the learning was all about concept. Only
after we struggled through the theoretical did we get
to the practical application. The U.S. was exactly the
opposite.  Even  before  I attended  a  course  I  was
already given a case study as pre-work—an example of
practical application. In the classroom it was all about
the three Ls of leadership or the six Cs of customer

satisfaction. From moment one, we were immersed in
practical solutions and examples of how to apply the
solutions.
Compared  with  other  European  cultures,  the  United
Kingdom  is  quite  applications-first.  But  when  the  United
Kingdom is measured against the United States, it appears
strongly principles-first—a vivid illustration of the power of
cultural relativity to shape our perceptions.
(You may be wondering where the Asian cultures fall on
the  Persuading  scale,  since  they  don’t  appear  in  the
diagram. Actually, the view of the world most common in
Asian  cultures  is  so  different  from  that  of  European-
influenced  cultures  that  an  entirely  different  frame  of
reference,  unrelated  to  the  Persuading  scale,  comes  into
play. We’ll discuss that uniquely Asian perspective later in
this chapter.)
WHEN PHILOSOPHY MEETS BUSINESS
Different cultures have different systems for learning in part
because of the philosophers who influenced the approach to
intellectual  life  in  general  and  science  in  particular.
Although  Aristotle,  a  Greek,  is  credited  with  articulating
applications-first  thinking  (induction),  it  was  British
thinkers, including Roger Bacon in the thirteenth century
and Francis Bacon in the sixteenth century, who popularized
these methodologies among modern scholars and scientists.
Later,  Americans,  with  their  pioneer  mentality  and
disinclination toward theoretical learning, came to be even
more applications-first than the British.
By contrast, philosophy on the European continent has
been  largely  driven  by  principles-first  approaches.  In  the
seventeenth century, Frenchman René Descartes spelled out
a method of principles-first reasoning in which the scientist
first formulates a hypothesis, then seeks evidence to prove
or disprove it. Descartes was deeply skeptical of data based

on mere observation and sought a deeper understanding of
underlying  principles.  In  the  nineteenth  century,  the
German Friedrich Hegel introduced the dialectic model of
deduction,  which  reigns  supreme  in  schools  in  Latin  and
Germanic countries. The Hegelian dialectic begins with a
thesis,  or  foundational  argument;  this  is  opposed  by  an
antithesis, or conflicting argument; and the two are then
reconciled in a synthesis.
Clear  examples  of  applications-first  and  principles-first
reasoning styles can also be found in the legal systems of
different societies. The British and American systems are
based on common law, in which a judgment in one case sets
a  precedent  for  future  cases—a  clear  example  of
applications-first thinking.
By contrast, most European Union states use the civil law
system that originated in Roman law and the Napoleonic
Code, in which a general statute or principle is applied on a
case-by-case basis, mirroring the principles-first approach.
Interestingly, Scandinavia uses a hybrid legal system that
does  not  fall  neatly  into  either  camp.  Note  the  middle
position of the Nordic countries on the Persuading scale.
As  we’ve  seen,  the  way  different  societies  analyze  the
world depends on their philosophical roots. These, in turn,
define how we learn in school and how we behave as adults
at  work.  It’s  what  Frenchman  Stéphane  Baron  realized
when he found his highly persuasive writing was not having
much  effect  on  his  British  colleagues.  A  graduate  of  the
prestigious Polytechnique engineering school, now on the
fast track at a large French industrial company, Baron was
working for Michelin in Clermont Ferrand, France, as part
of a global team whose other members were located mainly
in the United Kingdom. Baron recalls:
My British colleagues were not reading many of my e-
mails,  especially  the  most  important  ones.  It  was
starting to annoy me. I liked my British colleagues a
lot, and when we were face-to-face we had a great

connection. But I had multiple indications that, when I
sent e-mails to my team, they simply didn’t read them.
And  I  knew  the  British  were  big  e-mail  writers
themselves, so I didn’t think it could be cultural.
For  example,  Baron  recalls  carefully  crafting  a
persuasive  e-mail  written  to  propose  a  number  of  key
changes  to  company  processes.  The  structure  of  his
message looked something like this:
Paragraph 1: introduced the topic.
Paragraph 2: built up his argument, appealing to
his teammates’ sense of logic and developing the
general principle.
Paragraph 3: addressed the most obvious potential
concerns with Baron’s argument.
Paragraph 4: explained Baron’s conclusion and
asked for his teammates’ support.
Well educated in one of the most principles-first cultures
in  the  world,  Baron  instinctively  followed  the  dialectic
method  so  carefully  taught  in  the  French  school  system.
Notice how his second, third, and fourth paragraphs neatly
present  the  thesis,  antithesis,  and  synthesis  Baron
developed after much pondering of his topic.
On reflection, however, it’s pretty obvious why Baron’s
British colleagues did not read this e-mail. Raised on the
applications-first principle of Get to the point quickly and
stick to it, they got through paragraph one and, seeing no
clear  point  up  front,  moved  the  e-mail  message  to  their
“read at some undefined date in the future” file.
If  Kara  Williams  and  Stéphane  Baron  had  a  better
understanding  of  the  applications-first  and  principles-first
cultural tendencies, they would each have had the chance to
be a good deal more persuasive.
If  Williams  had  realized  she  was  presenting  to  an
audience  of  principles-first  Germans,  perhaps  she  would

have begun by presenting the parameters of her study and
explaining why she chose this specific study method. She
might  then  have  introduced  specific  data  to  show  her
reasoning   before   presenting   conclusions   and
recommendations.  She  wouldn’t  have  needed  to  spend
thirty  minutes  building  her  argument;  five  solid  minutes
describing her method before jumping to her results would
probably have created a lot of buy-in. In addition, if Williams
had  recognized  the  crucial  role  of  the  antithesis—the
counterargument—in the deductive process, she might have
welcomed the challenges from her audience as a sign of
interest instead of a lack of respect.
Similarly,  if  Baron  had  realized  he  was  writing  for  a
group raised on applications-first approaches, perhaps he
would  have  started  his  e-mail  with  a  few  bullet  points
summarizing his proposal and explaining what he needed
from the group. He might then have continued with a bit of
background  data,  presented  briskly  with  the  recognition
that “shorter is sweeter” for people with an applications-
first orientation.
Baron  subsequently  learned  this  lesson.  “One  British
colleague told me that, if my e-mail doesn’t fit on the screen
of  an  iPhone,  it  risks  not  getting  read,”  Baron  laughs.
“That’s the test I use now before I send out my e-mail.”
The  moral  is  clear.  Presenting  to  Londoners  or  New
Yorkers?  Get  to  the  point  and  stick  to  it.  Presenting  to
French, Spaniards, or Germans? Spend more time setting
the  parameters  and  explaining  the  background  before
jumping to your conclusion.
STRATEGIES FOR PERSUADING ACROSS
CULTURES
Effective leadership often relies on the ability to persuade
others  to  change  their  systems,  adopt  new  methods  of
working, or adjust to new trends in markets, technologies,
or  business  models.  So  if  you  are  a  manager  of  a  team

whose members come from a culture different from your
own, learning to adapt your persuasive technique to your
audience can be crucial.
Jorge Da Silva, a Brazilian engineer with a steel company
headquartered in southern Brazil, explains how he learned
to use a different approach when seeking to influence a new
team of colleagues located in Houston, Texas:
We had developed a new method for monitoring safety
risks in our plants that was working beautifully and
required less oversight than the status quo. Our Latin
American offices were in the process of adopting the
new method, but our U.S. office was resisting. They
felt the method they used worked fine.
We  kept  trying  to  explain  to  them why  the  new
process was so important. However, we didn’t seem to
be persuading them. So we developed a very detailed
presentation  that  explained,  slide  by  slide,  the  key
concepts addressed in the new method. But the more
detailed we became, the less responsive our American
teammates were.
Finally, I called one of my colleagues in the U.S.,
Jake Kuderlee. I went to undergraduate school with
Jake in São Paulo and have had a great relationship
with  him  for  years.  Jake  asked,  “Have  you  tried
showing the decision-makers in the American office an
example of what could happen if the new process is
well implemented?”
Based  on  this  discussion,  we  invited  two  of  the
American  decision-makers  to  our  Brazilian  plant  to
witness how the new safety process worked. We took
two days to show them around the plant, to have them
interview the workers on the assembly lines, and to
review the production reports. They got a really good
look at the process in action, and they asked a lot of
questions. And when they got back to the U.S., they

got  the  ball  rolling.  Now  we  have  the  same  safety
process in the U.S. that we have in Brazil.
I learned my lesson. What is persuasive in Brazil
may not be persuasive in an American environment.
As  Da  Silva  learned,  applications-first  thinkers  like  to
receive  practical  examples  up  front;  they  will  extract
learning  from  these  examples.  In  the  same  vein,
applications-first learners are used to the “case method,”
whereby they first read a case study describing a real-life
story about a business problem and its solution, and then
induce general lessons from it.
Principles-first thinkers also like practical examples, but
they prefer to understand the basis of the framework before
they move to the application. And for anyone raised in a
principles-first  culture,  the  American  case  method  may
seem downright odd. One Spanish executive told me, “In
Spain, we have had it drilled into us since we were young
that every situation is different and you can’t assume that
what happens in one situation will happen in another. So,
when  we  are  supposed  to  review  the  situation  of  one
specific protagonist and extract general learning points, it
may feel not just weird but even a bit dumb.”
Shifting your persuasive style to match the preferences
of your audience can be a bit challenging. However, it is still
more complicated to choose the best approach if you have
Brazilians, Americans, Germans, and French all attending
the  same  presentation.  As  Jens  Hupert,  the  German
manager  working  with  Kara  Williams  in  the  automotive
industry, says, “My reality today is no longer a neat group of
American or Germans but a large mix of participants from
around the world.”
The best strategy for managers in Jens’s situation is to
cycle  back  and  forth  between  theoretical  principles  and
practical examples. Provide practical examples to capture
the  interest  of  your  applications-first  listeners.  The
principles-first  participants  will  enjoy  them  also.  But  you

may find the latter asking theoretical questions, and, while
you are answering them, the applications-first learners get
bored. Try ignoring their boredom for a moment. Avoid the
temptation to push away conceptual questions, as you risk
sacrificing the interest and respect of your principles-first
audience. Instead, take the time to answer the questions
well and then quickly provide a couple of practical examples
to recapture the waning attention of the applications-first
students.
You may find that, no matter how well you shuttle back
and forth, it will be difficult to satisfy all of your listeners all
of the time. But if you are aware of the Persuading scale and
the challenges it presents, you can read the cues from your
audience more clearly and react accordingly.
The same differences that make it hard to persuade a
multicultural audience can also make it difficult to improve
collaboration among members of a multicultural team. Such
teams  are  often  much  slower  to  make  decisions  than
monocultural  ones,  and,  if  you  consider  the  Persuading
scale  for  a  moment,  it  is  easy  to  see why.  If  some  team
members  are  using  principles-first  logic  and  others  are
using applications-first logic to reach a decision, this can
lead to conflict and inefficiency from the beginning. To make
matters worse, most people have little understanding about
the logic pattern they use, which leads them to judge the
logic patterns of others negatively.
If  the  performance  of  your  global  team  is  suffering
because its members are operating at different ends of the
Persuading scale, consider the following strategies:
• Build  team  awareness  by  explaining  the  scale.
Have  everybody  read  this  chapter  and  discuss  it
during a team meeting.
• A cultural bridge can help a lot. If you have team
members  who  are  bicultural  or  have  significant
experience living in different cultures, ask them to
take responsibility for helping other team members.
• Understand and adapt to one another’s behaviors.

• Patience  and  flexibility  are  key.  Cross-cultural
effectiveness takes time. Developing your own ability
to recognize others’ reactions and adapt accordingly
will  help  you  to  be  increasingly  persuasive  (and
therefore effective) when working internationally.
HOLISTIC THINKING: THE ASIAN APPROACH
TO PERSUASION
Across  Western  countries,  we  see  strong  differences
between  applications-first  and  principles-first  patterns  of
thinking.  But  when  considering  the  differences  between
Asian  and  Western  thought  patterns,  we  need  to  use  a
different  lens.  Asians  have  what  we refer  to  as holistic
thought patterns, while Westerners tend to have what we
will call a specific approach.
I ran into the Chinese holistic pattern while teaching a
course  for  a  group  of  seventeen  top-level  Chinese
executives, preparing them to work in Europe. They came
from different Chinese companies and different regions of
China. Four were women. Six lived in Poland, Hungary, and
the  Netherlands,  and  the  rest  in  China.  Although  some
spoke English, I taught the session through simultaneous
translation into Mandarin.
I started by covering the Communicating, Leading, and
Trusting scales (the latter two of which we’ll discuss later in
this book). The audience was so enthusiastic that they took
photos of the classroom and my slides and even recorded
video clips on their iPhones. I then asked them to break out
into  groups  to  discuss  how  they  might  handle  different
attitudes about confrontation on a global team consisting of
French and Germans (who see confrontation as a key aspect
of  the  decision-making  process)  and  Chinese  (who  see
confrontation  as  an  affront  to  team  relationships).  They
discussed the issue animatedly in their separate rooms and
came back to the classroom for the debriefing.

We  started  by  asking,  “What  steps  should  the  team
leader in this case take to manage different attitudes toward
confrontation on the team?”
Lilly  Li,  a  bird-like  woman  with  thick  glasses  and  a
pleasant smile who had been running operations in Hungary
for two years, raised her hand:
Let me give my thoughts. In Hungary, we have people
from many different countries—from all over Europe,
in fact. The Trusting scale has been a big challenge
for us, as the Hungarians do not take the same time to
build personal relationships as we do in China. Let me
explain some of the negative impact of not having a
trusting relationship in our organization.
Now  I  was  a  little  confused,  because  the  question  I’d
asked  was  about  confrontation,  not  about  trusting—and
there were no Hungarians in the case study we just read. I
pushed the earpiece closer to my ear to make sure I was
hearing the translator correctly. Lilly Li continued to talk for
several minutes about trust, hierarchy, and her experiences
in Hungary, and the Chinese participants listened carefully.
After several long minutes of interesting comments that had
—from  my  perspective—absolutely  zero  to  do  with  the
question I’d asked, Lilly Li came to the point: “In this case,
if the team leader had spent more time helping the team
build  relationships  outside  of  the  office,  that  would  have
been very helpful during the meeting. The team would have
been much more comfortable dealing with open debate and
direct  confrontation  if  the  relationships  on  the  team  had
been stronger.”
Then another participant, Mr. Deng, raised his hand, I
restated the specific question: “What steps should the team
leader in this case take to manage different attitudes toward
confrontation on the team?” Mr. Deng began:

Let me give my perspective. I have been working in
the  technology  industry  for  many  years.  In  my
company, we have lots of young people who are very
eager and hardworking. Yet hierarchy is still strong in
our company. During a meeting, if a young person is
asked a question, he will look to his boss first to see if
the  boss’s  face  indicates  approval.  If  the  boss
approves,  the  younger  employee  will  also  express
approval.
By now I was thinking to myself, “Mr. Deng, please don’t
forget the question!” After several long minutes’ worth of
comments  about  the  role  of  hierarchy  in  his  own
organization, Mr. Deng observed, “On a global team, such as
in  this  case,  Chinese  employees  may  confront  their
colleagues, but they will certainly never confront the boss.
The team leader could remove himself from the meetings in
order to allow for more comfortable discussions amongst his
team members.”
All  morning  long,  the  students’  comments  followed  a
similar  pattern:  After  taking  several  minutes  to  discuss
peripheral information, during which they would loop back
to topics we had already discussed, they would then get to
their  point  and  come  to  a  conclusion  about  the  topic  at
hand. Gradually it became clear to me that this behavior did
not reflect the idiosyncratic style of one person or even of
one group, but rather a wider cultural norm—one that has
been revealed by some of the most intriguing research in
the cross-cultural field.
Professors  Richard  Nisbett  and  Takahiko  Masuda
presented  twenty-second  animated  video  vignettes  of
underwater scenes to Japanese and American participants
(see an illustration of one of the vignettes in Figure 3.2 on
page 108).
1
 Afterward, participants were asked what they
had  seen,  and  the  first  sentence  of  each  response  was
categorized.

The  results  of  the  study  were  remarkable.  While  the
Americans mentioned larger, faster-moving, brightly colored
objects in the foreground (such as the big fish visible in the
illustration), the Japanese spoke more about what was going
on in the background (for example, the plants or the small
frog  to  the  bottom  left).  In  addition,  the  Japanese  spoke
twice   as   often   as   the   Americans   about   the
interdependencies  between  the  objects  up  front  and  the
objects in  the  background.  As  one  Japanese  woman
explained,  “I  naturally  look  at  all  the  items  behind  and
around the large fish to determine what kind of fish they
are.”

FIGURE 3.2
In a second study, Americans and Japanese were asked to
“take a photo of a person.” The Americans most frequently
took  a  close-up,  showing  all  the  features  of  the  person’s
face, while the Japanese showed the person in his or her
environment instead, with the human figure quite small in
relationship to the background (see Figure 3.3).
In a third study, Nisbett and Masuda asked American and
Taiwanese students to read narratives and watch videos of
silent comedies—for example, a film about a day in the life
of  a  woman,  during  which  circumstances  conspire  to
prevent her from getting to work—and then to summarize

them.  In  their  summaries,  the Americans  made  about  30
percent more statements referring to the central figures of
the stories than their Taiwanese counterparts did.
2
FIGURE 3.3. Left: American portrait. Right: Japanese portrait
PHOTOS BY MELISSA VERONESI
Notice  the  common  pattern  in  all  three  studies.  The
Americans focus on individual figures separate from their
environment,  while  the  Asians  give  more  attention  to
backgrounds and to the links between these backgrounds
and the central figures. I have found these tendencies to be
borne out in my own interviews with groups of multicultural
managers.  While  Western  European  and  Anglo-Saxon
managers  generally  follow  the  American  tendencies  of
specific  thinking  patterns,  East  Asians  respond  as  the
Japanese and Taiwanese did in Nisbett’s research.
In  addition,  I’ve  often  watched  Westerners  and  Asians
discuss these studies. Here’s a bit of dialogue taken directly
from a classroom debate about the photo study:

Western participant: But the instructions said to take
a photo of a person, and the picture on the left is a
photo of a person. The picture on the right is a photo
of a room. Why would the Japanese take a photo of a
room when they have been asked to take a photo of a
person?
Asian participant: The photo on the left is not a
photo of the person. It is a close-up of a face. How can
I determine anything about the person by looking at
it? The photo on the right is a photo of the person, the
entire person, including surrounding elements so you
can  determine  something  about  that  person.  Why
would the Americans take a close-up of a face, which
leaves out all of the important details?
Perhaps it’s not surprising that Westerners and Asians
tend to display these different patterns of interpretation. A
common tenet of Western philosophies and religions is that
you can remove an item from its environment and analyze it
separately.  Aristotle,  for  example,  emphasized  focusing
attention on a salient object. Its properties could then be
assessed and the object assigned a category with the goal of
finding  rules  that  governed  its  behavior.  For  example,
looking at a piece of wood floating in water, Aristotle said
that  it  had  the  property  of  “levity,”  while  a  stone  falling
through air had the property of “gravity.” He referred to the
wood and the rock as if each was a separate and isolated
object in its own right. Cultural theorists call this specific
thinking.
Chinese  religions  and  philosophies,  by  contrast,  have
traditionally   emphasized   interdependencies   and
interconnectedness. Ancient Chinese thought was holistic,
meaning that the Chinese attended to the field in which an
object was located, believing that action always occurs in a
field  of  forces  that  influence  the  action.  Taoism,  which
influenced Buddhism and Confucianism, proposes that the
universe  works  harmoniously,  its  various  elements

dependent  upon  one  another.  The  terms yin  and yang
(literally  “dark”  and  “light”)  describe  how  seemingly
contrary forces are interconnected and interdependent.
With this background in mind, let’s reconsider my class
of seventeen Chinese executives. Here’s a comment from
one of the Chinese participants after we’d discussed the fish
and photo research studies:
Chinese people think from macro to micro, whereas
Western  people  think  from  micro  to  macro.  For
example, when writing an address, the Chinese write
in  sequence  of  province,  city,  district,  block,  gate
number.  The  Westerners  do  just  the  opposite—they
start with the number of a single house and gradually
work their way up to the city and state. In the same
way,  Chinese  put  the  surname  first,  whereas  the
Westerners do it the other way around. And Chinese
put the year before month and date. Again, it’s the
opposite in the West.
It’s  easy  to  see  how  these  differences  in  the
characteristic sequence of thinking may cause difficulty or
misunderstanding  when  people  from  Asian  and  Western
cultures are involved in conversation. A typical example is
that Westerners may think that the Chinese are going all
around the key points without addressing them deliberately,
while East Asians may experience Westerners as trying to
make a decision by isolating a single factor and ignoring
significant interdependencies.
This difference affects how business thinking is perceived
in Western and Asian cultures. In the eyes of Asian business
leaders, European and American executives tend to make
decisions without taking much time to consider the broader
implications of their actions. As Bae Pak from the Korean
motor  company  Kia  explains,  “When  we  work  with  our
Western  colleagues,  we  are  often  taken  aback  by  their
tendency to make decisions without considering how their

decisions are impacting various business units, clients, and
suppliers. We feel their decisions are hasty and often ignore
the surrounding impact.”
INCREASING YOUR EFFECTIVENESS
In  a specific  culture  when  managing  a  supplier  or  team
member,  people  usually  respond  well  to  receiving  very
detailed and segmented information about what you expect
of each of them. If you need to give instructions to a team
member from a specific culture, focus on what that person
needs to accomplish when. If you explain clearly what you
need each person to work on, that allows them to home in
effectively on their specific task.
In holistic cultures if you need to motivate, manage, or
persuade someone, you will be more influential if you take
the time to explain the big picture and show how all the
pieces fit together. When I interviewed Jacek Malecki, an
unusually  big  man  with  a  friendly  round  face  and  quiet
voice,  he  was  working  for  Toshiba  Westinghouse.  He
provided this example of how he had learned to manage his
staff in a more holistic manner.
I had recently been promoted and for the first time I
was managing not just Europeans and Americans but
also  Japanese.  I  have  managed  teams  for  sixteen
years, and I’ve learned over the years to do it well.
When I took my first trip to meet with my Japanese
staff,  I  managed  the  objective-setting  process  like  I
always had. I called each person on the team into my
office for a meeting. During the meeting we discussed
what each individual on the team should accomplish. I
outlined each person’s short-term and long-term goals
and  the  individual  bonus  plan  for  meeting  and
exceeding expectations.

But  as  Malecki  later  realized,  his  approach  had  not
worked  well  for  his  Japanese  team.  “If  they  don’t
understand what others are working on and how the pieces
fit  together,  they  don’t  feel  comfortable  or  persuaded  to
move  to  action.  Although  I  noticed  they  asked  a  lot  of
peripheral  questions  during  the  meetings,  none  of  them
actually explained to me that my approach was not ideal for
them  so  I  went  back  to  Poland  with  a  false  sense  of
comfort.”
When Malecki returned to Tokyo several weeks later he
saw  that  the  way  he  had  divided  up  the  tasks  and  set
individual  incentives  didn’t  match  the  way  his  team  was
working.
The team had spent a lot of time consulting with one
another about what each person had been asked to do
and  how  their  individual  objectives  fit  together  to
create a big picture. The team was now making good
progress  but  not  in  the  way  I  had  segmented  the
project. I learned that the type of specific division of
tasks as well as individual incentive plans don’t work
well in a Japanese environment.
The lesson Malecki learned is a good one for anyone who
needs to manage or influence holistic thinkers. If you need
to explain a project or set objectives or sell an idea to a
holistic  audience,  begin  by  explaining  the  big  picture  in
detail. Outline not just the overall project but also how the
parts are connected before drilling down what specifically
needs to be accomplished and when.
AVOIDING THE PITFALLS, REAPING THE
BENEFITS
With words like “diversity” and “global” all the rage, many
companies are seeking to create multinational, multicultural
teams  in  an  effort  to  reap  benefits  in  the  form  of  added

creativity  and  greater  understanding  of  global  markets.
However, as we’ve seen, cultural differences can be fraught
with  challenges.  Effective  cross-cultural  collaboration  can
take more time than monocultural collaboration and often
needs to be managed more closely. Here are two simple tips
that can help you realize the benefits of such collaboration
while avoiding the dangers.
First,  on  a  multicultural  team,  you  can  save  time  by
having as few people in the group work across cultures as
possible. For example, if you are building a global team that
includes small groups of participants from four countries,
choose  one  or  two  people  from  each  country—the  most
internationally experienced of the bunch—to do most of the
cross-cultural collaborating. Meanwhile, you can leave the
others to work in the local way that is most natural to them.
That way, you can have the innovation from the combination
of cultures, while avoiding the inefficiency that comes with
the clash of cultures.
Second,  think  carefully  about  your  larger  objectives
before you mix cultures up. If your goal is innovation or
creativity, the more cultural diversity the better, as long as
the process is managed carefully. But if your goal is simple
speed and efficiency, then monocultural is probably better
than multicultural. Sometimes, it is simply better to leave
Rome to the Romans.

4
How Much Respect Do You
Want?
Leadership, Hierarchy, and Power
What does a good boss look like? Try to answer the question
quickly without giving it much thought. When you picture
the perfect leader, is he wearing a navy Armani suit and a
pair  of  highly  polished  wingtips,  or  khaki  trousers,  a
sweater, and comfy jogging shoes? Does she travel to work
on a mountain bike or driving a black Ferrari? Is the ideal
leader someone that you would naturally call “Mr. Director,”
or would you prefer to address him as “Sam”?
For Ulrich Jepsen, a Danish executive in his early thirties
who has spent the past ten years on the management fast
track   working   for   Maersk,   a   Copenhagen-based
multinational  container-shipping  company,  the  answer  is
clear:
In  Denmark,  it  is  understood  that  the  managing
director is one of the guys, just two small steps up
from the janitor. I worked hard to be the type of leader

who  is  a  facilitator  among  equals  rather  than  a
director  giving  orders  from  on  high.  I  felt  it  was
important  to  dress  just  as  casually  as  every  other
member of my team, so they didn’t feel I was arrogant
or consider myself to be above them.
Danes  call  everyone  by  their  first  name  and  I
wouldn’t feel comfortable being called anything but
Ulrich. In my staff meetings, the voices of the interns
and administrative assistants count as much as mine
or  any  of  the  directors.  This  is  quite  common  in
Denmark.
Jepsen  does  not  have  an  open-door  policy—but  only
because he doesn’t have a door. In fact, he chose to not have
an  office  (they  are  rare  in  his  company’s  headquarters).
Instead, he works in an open space among his staff. If any
team members need a quiet place to talk, they can slip into
a nearby conference room.
Jepsen continues:
Managing Danes, I have learned that the best way to
get  things  done  is  to  push  power  down  in  the
organization  and  step  out  of  the  way.  That  really
motivates  people  here.  I  am  a  big  fan  of  tools  like
management by objectives and 360-degree feedback,
which allow me to manage the team from more or less
the same level as them.
The  belief  that  individuals  should  be  considered  equal
and that individual achievement should be downplayed has
been a part of Scandinavian society for centuries, but it was
codified in the so-called “Law of Jante” by Danish author
Aksel Sandemose in his 1933 novel En flyktning krysser sitt
spor (A Fugitive Crosses His Tracks). Sandemose’s writing
was  intended  as  a  critique  of  Scandinavian  culture  as
reflected in the homogeneity and repression characteristic
of the fictional small town of Jante. Nonetheless, the rules of

equality  Sandemose  described  seem  to  be  deeply  etched
into the Danish psyche. Jepsen observes:
Although a lot of Danes would like to change this, we
have  been  bathed  since  childhood  in  extreme
egalitarian  principles:  Do  not  think  you  are  better
than others. Do not think you are smarter than others.
Do not think you are more important than others. Do
not  think  you  are  someone  special.  These  and  the
other Jante rules are a very deep part of the way we
live and the way we prefer to be managed.
Jepsen’s egalitarian leadership style was so appreciated
in Denmark that he was promoted four times in four years.
But  the  fifth  promotion  put  Jepsen  in  charge  of  the
company’s  recently  acquired  Russian  operation,  his  first
international leadership position.
Relocated to a small town outside of Saint Petersburg,
Jepsen was surprised by the difficulties he encountered in
managing his team. After four months in his new job, he e-
mailed me this list of complaints about his Russian staff:
1. They call me Mr. President
2. They defer to my opinions
3. They are reluctant to take initiative
4. They ask for my constant approval
5. They treat me like I am king
When  Jepsen  and  I  met  to  discuss  his  cross-cultural
challenges, he provided a concrete example: “Week two into
the job, our IT director e-mailed me to outline in detail a
problem  we  were  having  with  the  e-mail  process  and
describing  various  solutions.  He ended  his  e-mail,  ‘Mr.
President, kindly explain how you would like me to handle
this.’ This was the first of many such e-mails from various
directors to fill my inbox. All problems are pushed up, up,
up, and I do my best to nudge them way back down.” After

all, as Jepsen told the IT manager, “You know the situation
better than I do. You are the expert, not me.”
Meanwhile,  the  members  of  Jepsen’s  Russian
management  team  were  equally  annoyed  at  Jepsen’s
apparent lack of competence as a leader. Here are some of
the complaints they offered during focus group interviews:
1. He is a weak, ineffective leader
2. He doesn’t know how to manage
3. He gave up his corner office on the top floor,
suggesting to the company that our team is of no
importance
4. He is incompetent
While Jepsen was groaning that his team members took
no initiative, they were wringing their hands about Jepsen’s
lack of leadership: “We are just waiting for a little bit of
direction!”
How  about  you?  Do  you  prefer  an  egalitarian  or  a
hierarchical management approach? No matter what your
nationality, the answer is probably the same. Most people
throughout the world claim to prefer an egalitarian style,
and  a  large  majority  of  managers  say  that  they  use  an
egalitarian approach themselves.
But  evidence  from  the  cross-cultural  trenches  shows
another story. When people begin managing internationally,
their day-to-day work reveals quite different preferences—
and  these  unexpected,  unconscious  differences  can  make
leading across cultures surprisingly difficult, as a Mexican
manager named Carlos Gomez discovered when his work for
the  Heineken  brewing  company  brought  him  a  continent
away, to Amsterdam.
Teaching a group of Heineken managers feels at first a
little  like  entering  a  sports  bar.  The  classroom  walls  are
covered with advertisements for various beer brands and
there are life-size cardboard cutouts of cocktail waitresses
serving  up  a  cold  one  as  you  enter  the  room.  Given  the

overall spirit of relaxed friendliness, I was half expecting the
participants to lurch into a round of the Dutch drinking song
“In de Hemel is Geen Bier” (In Heaven There Is No Beer) as
I started my session.
Heineken, of course, is a Dutch brewing company with a
market presence in seventy countries. If you like beer, it’s
likely you know one of the international Heineken brands,
not only the eponymous Heineken but also Amstel, Moretti,
or Kingfisher. When you visit Heineken’s headquarters in
Amsterdam, in addition to finding a beer-tasting museum
around the corner, you will find a lot of tall blond Dutch
people and also a lot of . . . Mexicans. In 2010, Heineken
purchased a big operation in Monterrey, Mexico, and now a
large  number  of  Heineken  employees  come  from
northeastern Mexico.
One  is  Carlos  Gomez,  and  as  our  session  began,  he
described  to  the  class  his  experiences  since  moving  to
Amsterdam a year earlier.
“It is absolutely incredible to manage Dutch people and
nothing like my experience leading Mexican teams,” Gomez
said, “because the Dutch do not care at all who is the boss
in the room.”
At this, Gomez’s Dutch colleagues began breaking into
knowing laughter. But Gomez protested:
Don’t laugh! It’s not funny. I struggle with this every
day. I will schedule a meeting in order to roll out a
new process, and during the meeting my team starts
challenging the process, taking the meeting in various
unexpected   directions,   ignoring   my   process
altogether,  and  paying  no  attention  to  the  fact  that
they  work  for  me.  Sometimes  I  just  watch  them
astounded. Where is the respect?
You guys know me. You know I am not a tyrant or a
dictator, and I believe as deeply in the importance of
leveraging creativity from every member of the team
as any Dutch person in this room. But in the culture

where I was born and raised and have spent my entire
life, we give more respect to someone who is senior to
us. We show a little more deference to the person in
charge.
Yes, you can say we are more hierarchical. And I
don’t know how to lead a team if my team does not
treat me as their boss, but simply one of them. It is
confusing  for  me,  because  the  way  they  treat  me
makes  me  want  to  assert  my  authority  more
vigorously than I would ever want or need to do in
Mexico.  But  I  know  that  is  exactly  the  wrong
approach.
I know this treating everyone as pure equals is the
Dutch way, so I keep quiet and try to be patient. But
often I just feel like getting down on my knees and
pleading  with  them,  “Dear  colleagues,  in  case  you
have forgotten—I . . . am . . . the boss.”
GEERT HOFSTEDE AND THE CONCEPT OF
POWER DISTANCE
Carlos  Gomez  finds  managing  a  team  of  workers  from
Holland terribly frustrating because of the enormous gap
between  Mexican  and  Dutch  cultures  when  it  comes  to
power distance. This concept grew out of an ocean journey
taken at the age of eighteen by Geert Hofstede, who would
eventually  become  the  most  famous  cross-cultural
researcher in history.
Hofstede traveled to Indonesia as an assistant engineer
on  a  ship  and  was  struck  by  the  cultural  differences
between the people of Indonesia and his fellow Dutchmen.
Later, when he got to know an English woman on a different
voyage, he realized that strong cultural differences can exist
even between countries that are geographically close. These
differences fascinated Hofstede. Eventually, as a professor
of social psychology, Hofstede was the first person to use
significant research data to map world cultures on scales.

Hofstede  developed  the  term  “power  distance”  while
analyzing  100,000  management  surveys  at  IBM  in  the
1970s. He defined power distance as “the extent to which
the  less  powerful  members  of  organizations  accept  and
expect that power is distributed unequally.” Hofstede also
looked at power distance in families and in various other
social structures, such as tribes or communities.
1
In  a  more  recent  study,  a  group  of  academic  scholars
from  around  the  world  led  by  Professor  Robert  House
conducted  thousands  of  interviews  across  sixty-two
countries  during  which  they  tested  and  calibrated
Hofstede’s data on the power distance scales again.
2
 This
project is often referred to as the Globe Project. House and
his colleagues looked at the degree to which inequality in a
society is both supported and desired and considered the
impact  on  egalitarian  versus  hierarchical  leadership
preferences in various countries.
The  Leading  scale  takes  Hofstede’s  idea  of  power
distance  and  applies  it  specifically  to  business.  Power
distance relates to questions like:
• How much respect or deference is shown to an
authority figure?
• How god-like is the boss?
• Is it acceptable to skip layers in your company? If you
want  to  communicate  a  message  to  someone  two
levels above or below you, should you go through the
hierarchical chain?
• When you are the boss, what gives you an aura of
authority?
As the last question in this list suggests, power distance
is  related,  in  part,  to  the  signals  that  are  used  to  mark
power within an organization or other social group. Such
signals,  of  course,  may  be  interpreted  very  differently  in
different parts of the world. Behavior that shouts “This man
has the leadership skills to move mountains and motivate

armies”  in  one  society  may  squeak  “This  man  has  the
leadership skills of a three-footed mouse” in another.
In  an  egalitarian  culture,  for  example,  an  aura  of
authority is more likely to come from acting like one of the
team, while in a hierarchical culture, an aura of authority
tends to come from setting yourself clearly apart.
I met Anne-Hélène Gutierres when she was the teaching
assistant in my advanced French course at the University of
Minnesota.  I  sat  behind  her  in  class,  admired  her  long
smooth brown hair and her lightly accented English, and
tried to imagine what it would be like to leave the Parisian
City  of  Lights  for  the  long,  cold  winters  of  midwestern
America.
As  luck  would  have  it,  I  bumped  into  Gutierres  again
years later, when we had both moved to Paris. She told me
about some of the surprising things she had encountered
while working at a small Minneapolis-based consulting firm
—her first job outside of France.
One  morning  Gutierres  arrived  at  work  to  find  her
computer  wasn’t  working.  As  she  had  an  important
presentation  to  finish, she  turned  to  her  American
colleagues  for  advice.  She  recalls:  “Imagine  my  surprise
when they responded, ‘Pam isn’t here today, why don’t you
use her computer? She won’t mind. She has an open door
policy.’ Pam was the president of the company!”
Gutierres still remembers the feeling of opening up the
big glass door to Pam’s office, approaching her desk, and
touching the keyboard. “Even though Pam was out of the
country, I could feel the power of her position hovering over
that space. Later, when I told my French friends about the
experience,  we  all  laughed  trying  to  imagine  how  our
French  bosses  might  react  if  they  knew  we  had  made
ourselves comfortable sitting in their chairs and using their
things.”
Gutierres’s  story  suggests  the  aura  of  authority  that
surrounds  the  material  possessions  of  a  boss  in  French
culture.  More  broadly,  it  suggests  the  important  role

symbols play in defining power distance. Thus, if you are the
boss, your behavior may be speaking volumes without your
even recognizing it.
Take  a  simple  action  like  riding  a  bike  to  work.  In
countries like Jepsen’s Denmark, when the boss rides a bike
to  work  (which  is  common),  it  may  symbolize  to  the
egalitarian Danes a strong leadership voice: “Look, I’m one
of you.” Something similar applies in Australia, as explained
by Steve Henning, an executive in the textile industry:
One  of  my  most  proud  lifestyle  choices  back  in
Australia  was  the  fact  that  I  was  a  near-full-time
bicycle commuter. My Surly Long Haul Trucker bike
wasn’t just a toy; it was a fully equipped workhorse
that was used for shopping, getting around, traveling
to and from work, weekend leisure rides, and anything
else I needed.
I’m a senior vice president in our company, and my
Australian staff thought it was great that I rode a bike
to work. If anything, they liked that their boss showed
up to work in a bike helmet. So I decided to bring my
bicycle with me when I was assigned to a new job in
China.
Henning  had  been  using  his  bike  during  his  daily
commute in Beijing for a while when he discovered that the
tactic  had  certainly  attracted  attention  from  his  team
members. “Just not the type of attention I was hoping for,”
Henning sighs. While sharing a dinner and drinks with a
Chinese  colleague  and  friend,  Henning  learned  what  his
staff was saying about him:
My team was humiliated that their boss rode a bike to
work  like  a  common  person.  While  Chinese  bike  to
work  infinitely  more  than  Australians,  among  the
wealthier Chinese, bikes are not an option. There are

plenty of bikes on the road, but biking is for the lower
classes only.
So my team felt it was an embarrassment that their
boss rode a bike to the office. They felt it suggested to
the entire company that their boss was unimportant,
and that by association, they were unimportant, too.
Well, I love my bike, but I was in China to get my
team motivated and on track. I certainly didn’t want to
sabotage my success just to arrive sweaty at the office
every morning. I gave up the bike and started taking
public  transportation,  just  like  every  other  Chinese
boss.
Once you understand the power distance messages your
actions are sending, you can make an informed choice about
what behaviors to change. But if you don’t know what your
behaviors signify, you’ll have no control over the signals you
send—and the results can be disastrous.
HISTORICAL AND CULTURAL FACTORS THAT
AFFECT THE LEADING SCALE
Our  placement  of  cultures  on  the  Leading  scale,  which
positions  cultures  from  highly  egalitarian  to  strongly
hierarchical (Figure 4.1), draws heavily on Hofstede’s work
and the Globe Project research. It also incorporates data
from  my  own  work  with  hundreds  of  international
executives. On the scale and from now on we’ll use the word
egalitarian instead of low power distance and hierarchical
instead of high power distance.
A  glance  at  the  Leading  scale  reveals  a  number  of
interesting and important anomalies.

FIGURE 4.1. LEADING
One relates to the placement of European cultures on the
scale. Once, while doing some work for an Ohio-based food
producer,  I  worked  with  a  group  of  executives  who
frequently  sold  products  and  services  via  telephone  to
clients  from  many  countries.  When  I  spoke  to  the
participants  on  the  phone  during  my  planning  for  our
session, several told me that they would like to learn more
about the “European culture.”
Take a good look at the Leading scale and see if you can
identify  the  location  of  “European  culture.”  As  your  eye
scans from Denmark and Sweden on the extreme left of the
scale all the way down to Italy and Spain in the middle-
right,  you’ll  realize  that  what  it  means  to  be  “culturally
European”  on  this  scale  is  not  very  evident.  Although
Europe  is  a  small  geographical  area,  it  embraces  large
differences in opinion about what it means to be a good
boss.

These variations within Europe have been examined by a
number of different researchers. For example, in the 1980s,
1990s,  and  early  2000s,  my  colleague  Professor  André
Laurent  polled  hundreds  of  European  managers  about  a
number of leadership issues.
3
 One of the questions he asked
was, “Is it important for a manager to have at hand precise
answers to most of the questions subordinates may raise
about their work?”
Take  a  look  (Figure  4.2)  at  the  percentages  of
respondents from each country who responded “yes” to this
question:
As you can see, the answers varied dramatically from one
nationality to the next. While 55 percent of Italians polled
claimed that it is important for the boss to have most of the
answers, only 7 percent of Swedes thought the same way. In
recent  follow-up  interviews,  Swedish  managers  explained
that  a  conscious  approach  to  leadership  underlies  this
attitude.  One  commented,  “Even  if  I  know  the  answer,  I
probably won’t give it to my staff . . . because I want them to
figure it out for themselves.” An Italian manager would be
more likely to say, “If I don’t provide my people with the
answers they need, how can they move ahead?”
Intrigued  by  these  results,  Professor  Laurent  puzzled
over  the  historic  factors  that  might  have  pushed  these
various European cultures to have such different identities
when it comes to the role of the boss. Here are three clues
you might recall from your high school history classes.

FIGURE 4.2.
The first clue is one I recall from my tenth-grade teacher,
Mr.  Duncan,  who  told  our  class  about  how  the  Roman
Empire  swept  across  southern  Europe.  He  recounted  in
hushed tones how the Romans built hierarchical social and
political  structures  and  heavily  centralized  systems  for
managing their vast empire. The boundaries between the
different classes were strict and legally enforced. Members
of  different  classes  even  dressed  differently.  Only  the
emperor was allowed to wear a purple toga, while senators
could wear a white toga with a broad purple stripe along the
edge, and equestrians, who ranked just below the senators,
wore togas with a narrow purple stripe. The class of the
person was therefore noticeable at first glimpse.

So a first historical point is that the countries that fell
under the influence of the Roman Empire (including Spain,
Italy,  and,  to  a  lesser  degree,  France)  tend  to  be  more
hierarchical than the rest of Western Europe. Although your
Italian boss is unlikely to wear a purple toga, invisible and
subtle remnants of these attitudes still remain today.
The  second  clue  relates  to  a  much  later  European
empire,  one  that  dominated  the  northern  part  of  the
continent to almost as great an extent as the Roman Empire
dominated the south. When you think of the Vikings, you
may  think  of  hulking  muscular  men  with  long  walrus
mustaches and hats with horns, riding big ships and waging
bloody wars. What you may not know is that the Vikings
were surprisingly egalitarian. When settling in Iceland, they
founded one of the world’s early democracies. The entire
community was invited to the debating hall to thrash out the
hot topics of the day, followed by a vote, with each person’s
opinion carrying equal weight. Legend has it that, when the
Prince of Franks sent an envoy from southern Europe to
negotiate  with  the  Vikings,  the  puzzled  envoy  returned
confused and disheartened, complaining, “I couldn’t figure
out who to talk with. They said they were all the chiefs.”
The countries most influenced by the Vikings consistently
rank  as  some  of  the  most  egalitarian  and  consensus-
oriented cultures in the world today. So it is no surprise
that,  even  today,  when  you  walk  into  a  meeting  room  in
Copenhagen or Stockholm, it is often impossible to spot the
boss.
Our third historical clue relates to the distance between
the people and God in particular religions. Countries with
Protestant  cultures  tend  to  fall  further  to  the  egalitarian
side of the scale than those with a more Catholic tradition.
One  interpretation  of  this  pattern  is  that  the  Protestant
Reformation largely removed the traditional hierarchy from
the church. In many strains of Protestantism, the individual
speaks directly to God instead of speaking to God through
the priest, the bishop, and the pope. Thus, it’s natural that

societies in which Protestant religions predominate tend to
be more egalitarian than those dominated by Catholicism.
Of course, all three of these historical observations are
dramatic oversimplifications, as each country has a rich and
complex history that helps shape its leadership beliefs. But
even in this day of text messaging and video calls, where
cross-cultural  interactions  are  commonplace,  events  that
took place thousands of years ago continue to influence the
cultures in which individuals are raised and formed—and
these  historical  forces  help  to  explain  why  European
countries appear in such widely different locations on the
Leading scale.
Meanwhile, a glance to the right-hand side of the scale,
where hierarchical countries are clustered, reveals a large
number of Asian cultures. Here, again, we can point to a
significant  historical  influence  that  helps  to  explain  this
pattern—the ancient Chinese philosopher Confucius.
When  I  was  in  my  teens,  my  family  had  a  Chinese
doctoral student named Ronan living with us one winter in
Minneapolis. My older brother and I were often fighting,
and after one of our disagreements, Ronan told me the story
of Kong Rong, who was a Han Dynasty scholar, politician,
and warlord. According to Ronan, when Kong Rong was four
years old, he was given the opportunity to choose a pear
from among several. Instead of taking the largest pear, he
took the smallest pear, saying that the larger pears should
be  eaten  by  his  older  brothers.  Although  the  story  did
nothing to change my feelings toward my brother, the oddity
of the message stuck in my mind. I didn’t much like pears,
but I certainly wouldn’t give the nicest one to my brother
just because he happened to be born two years before me.
Obviously, I wasn’t raised with Confucian principles. But
in  Confucian  Asia,  the  older  sibling  is  clearly  positioned
above the younger one. Thus, in Chinese families, children
are generally not spoken to in the family by their personal
names but rather by their kinship titles (“Older sister,” “2nd
brother,”  “4th  sister,”  and  so  on).  In  this  way,  they  are

constantly reminded of their position in the family relative
to everyone else’s.
Confucius was mainly interested in how to bring about
societal  order  and  harmony.  He  believed  that  mankind
would  be  in  harmony  with  the  universe  if  everyone
understood their rank in society and observed the behaviors
proper to that rank. Accordingly, he believed that the social
order  was  threatened  whenever  people  failed  to  act
according  to  their  prescribed  roles.  Confucius  devised  a
system of interdependent relationships, a sort of structure
in which the lower level gives obedience to the higher, while
those who are higher protect and mentor the lower. The
structure,  which  he  called wu lun,  outlined  five  principal
relationships:
Emperor (kindness) over Subject (loyalty)
Father (protection) over Son (respect and
obedience)
Husband (obligation) over Wife (submission)
Older Brother (care) over Younger Brother (model
subject)
Senior Friends (trust) over Junior Friends (trust)
If Confucius were alive today and updated his model for
today’s business leaders, he would likely add a sixth human
relationship  to  his  structure:  Boss  (kindness,  protection,
care) over Subordinate (loyalty, respect, obedience).
To this day, perhaps because of their Confucian heritage,
East Asian societies, from China to South Korea to Japan,
have a paternalistic view of leadership that is puzzling to
Westerners. In this kind of “father knows best” society, the
patriarch sitting at the top of the pyramid rarely has his
views or ideas challenged. And though Asian countries have
begun to move past these narrowly defined roles in politics,
business, and daily life, due in part to growing influence
from the West, most Asians today are still used to thinking

in terms of hierarchy. They tend to respect hierarchy and
differences in status much more than Westerners.
In egalitarian cultures, the down-to-earth CEO who chats
with the janitor every morning on a first-name basis is often
singled out for praise. You won’t see this in China or Korea.
Some of the main points to remember about egalitarian
versus hierarchical cultures are summarized in Figure 4.3.

FIGURE 4.3.
LEARNING TO MANAGE IN A HIERARCHICAL
CULTURE
Like  any  good  American,  I  was  raised  to  be  quite
uncomfortable  with  the  idea  of  a  fixed  social  hierarchy.
When  I  thought  of  hierarchy,  I  thought  of  the  lowest
person’s responsibility to obey, which I felt suggested an
inhumane situation, like a relationship between slave and
owner. I saw this as being in direct contrast to individual
freedom.

However, in order to understand the Confucian concept
of hierarchy, it is important to think not just about the lower
level  person’s  responsibility  to  obey,  but  also  about  the
heavy responsibility of the higher person to protect and care
for those under him. The leader’s responsibility for caring
and teaching is just as strong as the follower’s responsibility
to  defer  and  follow  directions.  Those  from  Confucian
societies have believed for centuries that this type of dual
responsibility is the backbone of a virtuous society.
Recognizing  and  respecting  this  system  of  reciprocal
obligations is important for the manager from an egalitarian
society  who  finds  himself  working  with  a  team  from  a
hierarchical society, particularly one from Asia. Like a good
Confucian, you must remember your obligations. Your team
may follow your instructions to the letter, but in return, you
must show a consistent paternalistic kindness. Protect your
subordinates,  mentor  and  coach  them,  behave  as  a  kind
father would to his children, and always look out for their
interests. Play your role well, and you may find that leading
a team in a hierarchical culture brings many rewards.
After  several  years  in  China,  Steve  Henning,  the
Australian  bike  rider  we  met  earlier  in  the  chapter,
summarized his own experience:
What a pleasure to lead a Chinese team! When I was
managing in Europe, every idea I tried to implement
had to be hashed out at each level of the department.
Hours  and  hours  were  lost  trying  to  create  buy-in.
When  I  first  started  working  here  in  China,  I  felt
frustrated  that  my  staff  wouldn’t  push  back  or
challenge my ideas in the way I was used to. But I
have developed a very close relationship with my team
members over the past six years—almost a father-son
connection.  And  I  have  come  to  love  managing  in
China.  There  is  great  beauty  in  giving  a  clear
instruction  and  watching  your  competent  and

enthusiastic team willingly attack the project without
pushing back or challenging.
As we’ve noted, symbolic gestures can send important
signals about the style of leadership you practice. This is
why  the  use  of  names  is  significant.  Many  Western
managers,  who  tend  to  prefer  informal,  egalitarian
relationships,  try  to  get  their  Asian  subordinates  to  call
them by their first names. However, if the age and status
gap  is  wide,  most  will  be  uncomfortable  doing  so.  You’ll
have  better  luck  suggesting  they  call  you  by  a  hybrid
name/title—something like “Mr. Mike.”
Similarly, details of etiquette may prove critical to your
success in China, Korea, or Japan. When you enter a room,
you should know whose hand to shake first (the boss’s) and
with whom to exchange pleasantries before sitting down to
serious  business  (everyone  in  descending  hierarchical
order).  When  hosting  a  dinner,  you  should  make  seating
arrangements according to the rankings of your guests, lest
you offend someone. Get any of these details wrong, and
you risk not making it to the next meeting, let alone closing
the deal.
LEVEL-HOPPING: LOOK BEFORE YOU JUMP
No matter which country you work in, there is a PowerPoint
slide buried somewhere in the human resources department
that  shows  the  organizational  structure  of  your  company.
Your own name is located somewhere on the chart in a neat
box, and if you follow the lines up from that box you will see
the name of your boss, above that the name of your boss’s
boss,  and  eventually  the  name  of  the  chairman  of  the
company. If you follow the lines down, you will see those
who report to you listed in a neat line, and those who report
to those people in neat lines below that one. This kind of on-
paper hierarchy is common to every business culture—but
the appropriate ways to navigate it in the real world differ

widely, depending on how hierarchical or egalitarian that
culture is.
For example, what if you would like to speak to someone
who is not just one level above you (your direct boss) but
someone who is several levels above you? Can you simply
pick up the phone and dial that person’s number, or drop in
to the corner office for a quick meeting and a cup of coffee?
If you do this, how will the boss of bosses respond—and
what will your direct boss think?
The answer may depend in part on the type of company
you  work  for  and  the  specific  personalities  involved.  But
cultural differences may play an even greater role.
In  more  egalitarian  cultures,  it  is  often  acceptable  for
communication to skip organizational levels. Carlos Gomez,
the  Mexican  manager  working  in  the  Netherlands  for
Heineken, had this to say:
I  had  two  educational  experiences  shortly  after  my
move. First, my new administrative assistant, Karl de
Groot, was grabbing his coat to head out for lunch. I
asked him if he wanted to get a sandwich with me,
and he casually mentioned that he couldn’t because
he was having lunch with Jan, who is incidentally the
general manager of our operation and my boss’s boss.
Apparently they had met in the elevator and Karl had
suggested they have lunch. I was a little dumbfounded
that  an  administrative  assistant  would  set  up  a
meeting  with  his  boss’s  boss’s  boss  without  asking
anyone’s okay or even informing his direct supervisor
—me!
Gomez  asked  his  Dutch  colleagues  what  they  thought
about this incident, and everyone seemed to think it was
perfectly normal, so he shrugged it off. Then, during a staff
meeting a couple of weeks later, a second incident occurred:

One of my direct reports, a smart, ambitious manager
who has really good people skills, mentioned casually
that he had just e-mailed the CEO of the company with
some criticism about a new initiative. He announced it
to the entire team like it was the most normal thing in
the world that he would e-mail someone who has over
64,000  employees  and  is  five  levels  above  him,
without even telling me—his direct boss—or anyone
else.
Sometimes  when  I’m  uncomfortable,  I  feel  my
smile spread and freeze across my face, and this was
one of those times. I actively worked on keeping my
lips  firmly  closed  because  I  understood  that,  in  a
Dutch cultural environment, this was acceptable, but I
wanted to say, “You did what?!” I felt my pulse racing
just thinking about what kind of scolding I would be
getting from the big boss the next time I was in a
meeting with him about this loose cannon on my team.
Of course, that never happened, as he is also . . .
well, Dutch.
The fact that all the people involved in these two stories
lived and worked in the same environment made it a little
easier for Gomez to process the cultural challenge involved.
Over time, Gomez had become increasingly aware of what
was appropriate in a Dutch cultural environment, so he was
able  to  wrestle  with  his  reactions  in  order  to  respond
appropriately. The challenge of level-hopping can be even
more complicated when the individuals involved are living
and  working  in  different  countries,  as  may  happen  when
long-distance communication via phone, e-mail, or another
electronic medium is used.
I  was  once  asked  to  help  improve  the  collaboration
between two teams, one in Vancouver and one in Bangalore.
Sarah Peterson, the manager of the Vancouver team, had
eight  Canadians  working  for  her.  “We  develop  the
specifications for the software our clients need, and we send

it to Bangalore where Rishi Rangan’s team of about twenty-
five programmers complete the work,” she explained.
“The problem began a few months ago when I needed
information from one of the programmers on Rishi’s staff,
and  I  e-mailed  that  person  asking  for  information.  No
response. Three follow-up e-mails. Still no answer. Later, I
needed something from another person on Rishi’s team, but
again when I e-mailed her, no reply.”
Peterson was fed up. “We pay these guys good money to
do this work for us. So I called Rishi to complain about the
lack of communication from his team.” But the situation did
not improve. “It’s an incredible waste of time!”
In  hopes  of  diagnosing  the  cause  of  the  problem,  I
phoned Rangan. “I honestly don’t know what I have done to
break  trust  with  Sarah,”  he  sighed.  “But  things  have
become so bad between us now that she is unwilling to work
with me.”
I  asked  the  soft-spoken  Rangan  to  explain  what  had
happened.  And  what  I  heard  was  a  very  different
interpretation of the situation than the one I had heard from
Sarah Peterson:
Sarah  e-mails  my  staff  directly.  She  seems  to
purposefully circumnavigate me. I am the manager:
she should e-mail me, not my staff. Of course, when
my  team  members  receive  these  e-mails,  they  are
paralyzed by the fact that someone at her level would
e-mail them directly. They certainly don’t want to be
brought into this issue between her and me. And then
she complains that we are poor communicators!
As this story illustrates, although e-mail is a relatively
recent  technological  tool,  different  societies  have  already
developed radically different patterns for using it. Because
the two software teams in this case had misunderstood one
another so badly, it was necessary to convene an in-person
meeting between the groups to iron out their differences.

“The trip was expensive. It’s not cheap to fly nine people
from  Vancouver  to  Bangalore  for  a  three-day  meeting,”
Peterson later reflected. “But while together, we discussed
our perceptions, cultural differences, and expectations, and
we were able to improve the situation—to get back to page
one.”
When all is said and done, humans are flexible. Most of
the time, if managers take extra pains up front to discuss
how  they  are  going  to  communicate,  many  painful  and
costly faux pas can be avoided entirely. The problem comes
when both parties proceed, as Rangan and Peterson did, as
if their style was normal and the other party was wrong.
Once they understood the other’s behavior, things moved
along well. Peterson readily agreed to copy Rangan on all
her e-mails in the future. And Rangan agreed that it would
be  fine  for  her  to  go  straight  to  his  staff  with  urgent
requests:  He  would  let  them  know  the  new  protocol
immediately.
Here are some simple strategies for cross-cultural level-
skipping that can help you avoid the kinds of problems that
Rangan and Peterson encountered. If you are working with
people from a hierarchical society:
• Communicate with the person at your level. If you
are  the  boss,  go  through  the  boss  with  equivalent
status,  or  get  explicit  permission  to  hop  from  one
level to another.
• If you do e-mail someone at a lower hierarchical
level than your own, copy the boss.
• If you need to approach your boss’s boss or your
subordinate’s subordinate, get permission from the
person at the level in between first.
• When e-mailing, address the recipient by the last
name  unless  they  have  indicated  otherwise—for
example,  by  signing  their  e-mail  to  you  with  their
first name only.

If  you  are  working  with  people  from  an  egalitarian
society:
• Go directly to the source. No need to bother the
boss.
• Think  twice  before  copying  the  boss.  Doing  so
could suggest to the recipient that you don’t trust
them or are trying to get them in trouble.
• Skipping hierarchical levels probably won’t be a
problem.
• In Scandinavia, the Netherlands, and Australia,
use  first  names  when  writing  e-mails.  This  is  also
largely  true  for  the  United  States  and  the  United
Kingdom,  although  regional  and  circumstantial
differences may arise.
If you aren’t sure about where the culture you’re working
with  falls  on  this  scale,  follow  the  hierarchical
recommendations, which are generally safer and unlikely to
get you into trouble accidentally. And if you are leading a
global team, with members of various cultures with different
positions  on  the  Leading  scale,  define  team  protocols  up
front. When do we skip levels? Whom do we copy and when?
Most misunderstandings can be avoided by defining a clear
team culture that everyone agrees to apply.
WHEN INTERNATIONAL STAFFERS SHOW TOO
MUCH RESPECT—OR TOO LITTLE
“In China, the boss is always right,” says Steve Henning,
reflecting on his years of managing in Beijing. “And even
when the boss is very wrong, he is still right.”
If, like Henning, you find yourself managing staff in a
culture that is more hierarchical than your own, you may be
surprised and uncomfortable to see how much importance is
placed on what you say and how difficult it is to hear the
opinions of those in positions below you. “When I would ask

my staff members for their thoughts, advice, or opinions,
they would sit quietly staring at their shoelaces,” Henning
remembers. “I later learned that this type of questioning
suggested  to  them  that  I  was  trying  to  test  them  to  see
whether they knew what I wanted them to say. And since
they didn’t know, they felt it was safer to remain quiet.”
For Henning this situation was initially perplexing. “How
can I make good decisions if I don’t know what my group
really thinks about an issue?” he used to wonder. If you are
managing a group that respects your authority so much that
you are unable to get the input you need to make informed
decisions,  there  are  a  few  steps  you  can  take  without
completely  compromising  the  authority  of  your  position.
These strategies include:
• Ask your team to meet without you in order to
brainstorm  as  a  group—and  then  to  report  the
group’s ideas back to you. Removing “the boss” from
the  meeting  removes  their  need  to  defer,  allowing
people to feel more comfortable sharing ideas.
• When you call a meeting, give clear instructions a
few days beforehand about how you would like the
meeting to work and what questions you plan to ask.
Tell your team members explicitly that you will call
on them for their input. In this way, they can show
you respect by preparing and sharing their ideas. It
also gives the team members time to organize their
thoughts  carefully  and  to  check  with  one  another
before the meeting.
• If you are the boss, remember that your role is to
chair  the  meeting.  Don’t  expect  people  to  jump  in
randomly without an invitation. Instead, invite people
to speak up. Even if team members have prepared
well and are ready to share their ideas, they may not
volunteer unless you call on them individually. When
you do so, you may be surprised to see how much
they have to contribute.

On the other hand, you may find yourself in the same
situation as Carlos Gomez, managing a group from a culture
that is more egalitarian than your own. As Gomez explains,
“I sometimes feel as if I have no idea what my staff is doing,
because they rarely ask for feedback. For me, it has been a
short  step  from  feeling  ‘hands  off’  to  feeling  ‘out  of
control.’”
Gomez  began  poring  over  management  books
recommended  by  his  Dutch  colleagues  to  learn  their
preferred  leadership  systems.  He  found  that  the
management-by-objective  system  he  had  used  in  Mexico
could  easily  be  adapted  to  the  egalitarian  Dutch
environment. His suggestions include the following:
• Introduce management by objectives, starting by
speaking with each employee about the department’s
vision for the coming year and then asking them to
propose their best personal annual objectives subject
to negotiation and final agreement with you. In this
way,  you  become  a  facilitator  rather  than  a
supervisor  while  still  keeping  a  handle  on  what  is
being accomplished.
• Make  sure  the  objectives  are  concrete  and
specific  and  consider  linking  them  to  bonuses  or
other rewards.
• Set  objectives  for  a  twelve-month  period  and
check  on  progress  periodically—perhaps  once  a
month. If progress is satisfactory, you can give your
subordinate  more  space  for  self-management;  if
progress lags, you can get more involved.
In addition, consider taking some simple symbolic steps
to send appropriate signals about the leadership style you
plan to employ. Dress as your team members dress—if they
go  without  ties,  do  the  same  (except,  of  course,  when  a
client visit or a presentation to the board of directors calls
for a special “dress-up” protocol). Minimize the use of titles,
addressing your team members by their first names—and

encouraging them to do the same with you. And consider
rotating  the  leadership  role  during  staff  meetings  rather
than retaining personal control of the discussion.
Actions like these will demonstrate your flexibility and
allow your team members to feel comfortable working with
you. After all, you are the one in the cultural minority, so it’s
up to you to adapt—if you are the boss.
* * *
After  three  years  in  the  hierarchical,  high-power-distance
culture of Russia, Ulrich Jepsen had this to say:
I’ve  finally  learned  to  lead  well  in  this  different
environment, although it’s taken a major shift in the
way I look at my role as the boss. I can be friendly, as
friendly  as  I  would  be  in  Denmark,  but  I  have  to
maintain a greater distance with my staff and fulfill a
type  of  paternalistic  role  that  was  new  to  me.
Otherwise, my staff simply would not respect me or,
worse,  be  embarrassed  by  me.  And,  as  I  quickly
learned, without respect it is difficult to get anything
done.
In today’s global business environment it is not enough
to be either an egalitarian leader or a hierarchical leader.
You need to be both—to develop the flexibility to manage up
and down the cultural scales. Often this means going back
to square one. It means watching what makes local leaders
successful. It means explaining your own style frequently. It
may even mean learning to laugh at yourself when the right
moment arises. But ultimately it means learning to lead in
different ways in order to motivate and mobilize groups who
follow in different ways from the folks back home.

5
Big D or Little d
Who Decides, and How?
A merger between a New York City financial firm and an
organization in Germany proved to be one of the more tense
cross-cultural deals I’ve worked on. Going into the merger,
each   group   deeply   admired   the   other,   but
misunderstandings quickly began breaking down the initial
goodwill. A few months into the process, I interviewed the
executive teams on each side to get their perspectives on
how  things  were  going.  I  began  with  Larry  Nicoli,  an
intense,  high-energy  New  Yorker  with  a  lean  figure  and
booming voice, who was number two in the company.
“Incredible! These Germans are incredibly hierarchical,”
Nicoli exclaimed. “I had lunch—just lunch—with one of the
Munich-based analysts and later got my hand slapped by his
boss’s boss because he is several levels lower than me and I
hadn’t followed the proper protocol. Who cares what grade
level he’s at? Well, I learned one thing for certain—these
Germans do!”
A few days later, I met with Matthias Wulf, the German
HR executive who was leading the merger from the Munich

side. He gave me quite an earful.
These Americans give you the impression they are so
egalitarian  with  their  open-door  policies,  first-name
basis,  and  casual  dress.  Don’t  be  fooled.  They  are
much more hierarchical than we are! When the U.S.
boss says “March left!” the Americans all click their
heels  and  turn  left—no  question,  no  challenge.  I’ve
never seen anything like it. And if you are German,
and you dare to challenge your American boss, as is so
common  in  Germany,  don’t  be  surprised  if  you  find
yourself one step closer to unemployment. I know it’s
true—it happened to me!
If this had been my first experience working on a U.S.-
German  alliance,  I  might  have  been  baffled  by  these
seemingly  contradictory  complaints.  Maybe  I  would  have
chalked  them  up  to  the  organizational  cultures  of  the
groups, to the individual personalities involved—or to the
universal human capacity for hypocrisy.
But having worked on similar deals in the past, I wasn’t
surprised by these comments. I was expecting them.
When I first moved from the United States to Europe, I
was startled by the many remarks I heard from Germans
and other northern Europeans about how hierarchical the
American business culture is. We Americans believe deeply
that we are an egalitarian people. But the more I listened to
descriptions  of  American  culture  as  viewed  through  a
Germanic lens, the more I understood their point.
While  Americans  perceive  German  organizations  as
hierarchical because of the fixed nature of the hierarchical
structure,  the  formal  distance  between  the  boss  and
subordinate,  and  the  very  formal  titles  used,  Germans
consider American companies hierarchical because of their
approach  to  decision  making.  German  culture  places  a
higher value on building consensus as part of the decision-

making process, while in the United States, decision making
is largely invested in the individual.
CONSENSUS IS A FOUR-LETTER WORD
I  watched  the  best-selling  author  and  popular  American
business speaker Patrick Lencioni giving a keynote address
at an annual business conference in which he declared, “As
far  as  I’m  concerned,  ‘consensus’  is  a  four-letter  word!
Consensus fails to satisfy anyone’s desires, but it does so
equally,  and  so  it’s  accepted.  It  is  through  seeking
consensus that we get mediocrity.”
1
Lencioni’s disdain for group decision making reflects a
common American sentiment—and this is what the Germans
find incredible. Rejecting the need for group agreement, the
American boss says to the group, “This is what we are going
to do,” and most members of the team fall in line, regardless
of their own opinions. “United we stand, divided we fall,” is
a  powerful  American  value,  expressed  in  the  belief  that
getting behind the decision as quickly as possible leads to
efficiency, which in turn leads to success.
In this respect, American culture is one of a few outliers
on the world map. Most cultures that fall as egalitarian on
the  Leading  scale  also  believe  in  consensual  decision
making.  The  Swedes,  for  example,  are  both  extremely
egalitarian and one of the most consensual societies in the
world.  The  Dutch  also  put  a  strong  emphasis  on  both
egalitarian leadership style and consensual decision making.
By contrast, cultures that fall as hierarchical on the Leading
scale, from Morocco to Korea, are also top-down decision-
making  cultures.  In  a  large  majority  of  countries,  being
egalitarian correlates with valuing consensus. The United
States breaks the mold by combining an egalitarian ethos
with  a  more  top-down  approach  to  decision  making,  in
which one person—generally the person in charge—makes
decisions quickly on behalf of the entire group. Therefore,
the  United  States  is  more  top-down  than  hierarchical.  In

comparison to a country like Germany or Sweden, the value
is placed on one individual making a decision quickly and
everyone else following. And this person tends to be the
boss.
Conversely, there are a few cultures that break the mold
in a different way. In countries like Germany, a consensual
style of decision making, where more time is spent soliciting
group  feedback  and  coming  to  a  group  agreement,  is
combined with a hierarchical system. The fact that Germany
and  the  United  States  are  both  exceptions  to  the  global
pattern—but  in  opposite  directions—helps  to  explain  the
consternation  among  managers  from  these  two  cultures
when  they  are  thrown  together  in  a  decision-making
situation.
The  complications  that  can  arise  from  differences  in
decision-making style don’t stop there. Let’s go back to the
German-American  merger  talks.  Given  the  trying
circumstances, everyone involved was stressed and reacting
reflexively.  In  hopes  of  creating  an  effective  process  for
merging  the  two  groups,  the  integration  team,  including
both German and American managers, asked me to help.
My  first  meeting  was  with  two  German  directors:
Martina Müller, a small, expansive woman with her hair cut
into a neat blond bob, and her more reserved but equally
friendly boss, Matthias Wulf, who towered over Müller as
they  entered  my  office  in  Paris.  When  I  asked  them  to
describe the German managers’ reactions to the last few
months of integration efforts, they did not hold back.
Unsurprisingly,  Müller  and  Wulf  seemed  particularly
taken aback that the American CEO would make unilateral
decisions, which the rest of the company would scurry to
follow.  By  contrast,  their  previous  German  chairman  had
made  all  decisions  through  group  agreement.  “Even  the
agendas of the weekly management meetings are built by
consensus,” Müller explained. “The chairman distributes a
proposed agenda days before the meeting, and everyone on
the management board is asked to approve it or suggest

changes—which  would  again  be  circulated  for  group
approval before the actual meeting.”
This difference in decision-making patterns had produced
a  deep  sense  of  uneasiness  among  the  Germans.  “The
problem,”  Müller  explained,  “is  that  we  can’t  shake  this
feeling that the Americans are trying to trick us. We want to
believe that they mean well, but we have quite consistently
seen behavior that we feel is to the contrary.”
Müller described how seemingly positive meetings with
their  American  teammates  would  end  with  one  of  the
Americans saying, “Great, we have made a decision.” She
continued, “And for us, when you say ‘we will do this,’ it is a
commitment. A promise. You can’t just simply change your
mind casually tomorrow.” The Germans were taken aback
that the Americans could make decisions so quickly, without
a  lot  of  discussion  and  without  involving  all  parties.  In
response,  Müller  said,  “We  would  spend  days  on  end
working diligently on the implementation. And then one of
the Americans would just change his mind, or bring in more
data suggesting a different path. They casually change the
decision  every  week,  as  if  this  was  a  normal  part  of
teamwork.”
“After much grief and frustration,” Wulf added, “we have
concluded  that  for  Americans,  a  ‘decision’  is  simply  an
agreement to continue discussions. And if you are American
and you understand this, it is fine. But for a German, who
sees a decision as a final commitment to march forward on a
plan, this can cause a lot of problems.”
Later,  when  I  interviewed  the  American  team,  Larry
Nicoli expressed deep frustration that the Germans seemed
unable to adapt to new information: “It takes them weeks to
make a decision, and, once it is made, they cling to it with
their lives. But the world is dynamic. Things are changing. If
decisions  are  not  flexible,  how  can  we  beat  the
competition?”
As  with  other  cultural  characteristics,  these  differing
styles  of  decision  making  have  historical  roots.  American

pioneers, many of whom had fled the formal hierarchical
structures  of  their  home-lands,  put  heavy  emphasis  on
speed and individualism. Being successful as the pioneers
spread  west  across  the  American  plains  depended  on
arriving first and working hard, regarding mistakes as an
inevitable and ultimately insignificant side effect of speed.
As a corollary, Americans developed a dislike for too much
discussion, which would just slow them down, preferring to
make decisions quickly, often based on scanty information,
whether by the leader or by voting.
Of  course,  today’s  American  businesspeople  are  not
looking for gold in California ditches or searching for arable
farmland  on  empty  plains,  but  this  emphasis  on  rapid
individual decision making, accompanied by the sense that
decisions  can  always  be  changed,  remains  strong  in  the
national culture.
By  contrast,  the  preference  for  consensual  decision
making permeates many German companies, where power
is generally vested not in one CEO but in a small group of
senior  managers  who  manage  through  group  agreement.
Larger  companies  have  an Aufsichtstrat,  or  supervisory
board, which appoints a Vorstand, or managerial board. The
Vorstand  has  final  decision-making  responsibilities  on
company  policies,  and  the  chairman  of  the  company
therefore  has  considerably  less  individual  power  than  in
many other countries.
These differing styles of decision making have a dramatic
impact on the timeline of a typical project. In a consensual
culture, the timeline might look something like Figure 5.1.
FIGURE 5.1.

In a consensual culture, the decision making may take
quite a long time, since everyone is consulted. But once the
decision has been made, the implementation is quite rapid,
since everyone has completely bought in and the decision is
fixed and inflexible—a decision with a capital D, we might
say. Thus, the moment of making the decision is taken quite
seriously as the pivotal point in the process.
By contrast, in a top-down culture, the decision-making
responsibility  is  invested  in  an  individual.  In  this  kind  of
culture,  decisions  tend  to  be  made  quickly,  early  in  the
process, by one person (likely the boss). But each decision is
also  flexible—a  decision  with  a  lowercase d.  As  more
discussions  occur,  new  information  arises,  or  differing
opinions  surface,  decisions  may  be  easily  revisited  or
altered. So plans are subject to continual revision—which
means that implementation can take quite a long time (see
Figure 5.2).

FIGURE 5.2.
Either of these systems can work, as long as everyone
understands and follows the rules of the game. But when
the  two systems  collide,  misunderstandings,  inefficiency,
and frustration can occur, as illustrated by the complaints
that  arose  during  the  cross-cultural  struggles  of  my
American and German clients.
CONSENSUAL OR TOP-DOWN: WHICH DO YOU
PREFER?
As we’ve noted, both the United States and Germany are
outliers on the Deciding scale. Although the United States
falls  toward  the  egalitarian  end  of  the  Leading  scale,  it
appears  toward  the  top-down  side  of  the  Deciding  scale.
Meanwhile,  though  Germany  is  characterized  as  a
hierarchical culture on the Leading scale, it is marked by a
consensus-oriented decision-making style. Aside from these
two cultures, and one other we’ll look at later in the chapter,
most cultures have a similar position on the Leading and
Deciding scales (see Figure 5.3).

FIGURE 5.3. DECIDING
In today’s global business lexicon, the word “consensus”
has a positive ring. It sounds inclusive and modern and is
associated  with  other  universally  positive  words  like
“empowerment.” Thus, you may feel a sense of tribal pride
if your country is positioned on the consensus side of the
scale and a prickle of tribal defensiveness if your culture is
located on the top-down side.
However, when the time comes to make real decisions,
it’s clear that love for the process of consensus-building is
anything but universal. I discovered this truth the first time
I worked with a group of Swedes—members of a culture
that is positioned on the far left of the Deciding scale.
Shortly after my first move to Europe, my new boss, Per
Engman, introduced himself as a typical, consensus-building
Swedish manager. He explained that this is the best way to
assure that everyone was on board, and he hoped that I
would be patient with this very Swedish process. I loved the
sound of that. I was delighted with the idea of an inclusive
boss, who listened carefully to his staff and weighed all of
our views carefully before confirming a decision.
Our firm was a small consultancy with more work than
we  could  handle,  and  my  colleagues,  mainly  young,

energetic Swedes, worked long hours to meet targets and
keep  our  clients  happy.  Per  was  also  hardworking  and
energetic, and I admired his relaxed way of dealing with the
team—at least for my first two weeks on the job.
By then the e-mails had started mounting up in my in-
box. One morning, this message arrived:
Hey team
I thought we should meet for an annual face-to-face
meeting on December 6th. We could focus the meeting
on how to be more client-centric. What do you think?
Per
I thought, “Well, I don’t really have an opinion as to what
the meeting is about, and I’m too busy to think much about
it.” I hit the delete button. But in the hours that followed,
my Swedish colleagues began sending their responses:
Hi Per
Great idea. Thanks for taking the initiative. Really
looking forward to it. But we have focused so much on
client-centricity lately. Wouldn’t it be better to focus
the meeting on how to more successfully market our
services?
Lasse
Hi Per and everybody
For this meeting I think it would be most effective to
have presentations from each of the team members
about their individual client strategies so that we can
start to align our processes. If others don’t agree then
I would support Lasse’s idea of focusing on marketing.

Charlotte
And one by one each of my colleagues sent a response
with  their  opinions.  Then  there  were  more  e-mails  with
responses to the responses. Occasionally, Per would inject
an e-mail with a few comments. Slowly—ever so slowly, it
seemed to me—they began to reach a group agreement. And
then,  after  everyone  but  me  had  sent  multiple  replies,  I
received an individual e-mail.
Hi Erin
Haven’t heard from you, what do you think?
Per
I really wanted to respond by saying, “I have absolutely
no opinion. You are the boss—please make a decision so we
can get back to work.” Instead I reminded myself of how
delighted I had felt when Per had told me that he favored a
consensual decision-making style. So I simply replied that I
supported whatever the group decided.
In the weeks to come, as many other topics got the same
treatment, I realized that my gut instinct about myself had
been wrong. In fact, consensual decision making was not at
all the way I preferred to work. I also understood why Per
had felt it necessary to explain his consensual approach to
me so carefully before we started working together. He later
described to me how it feels to be Swedish working with
Americans,  who  are  “too  busy  to  work  as  good  team
members”  and  “always  trying  to  impose  a  decision  for
decision’s sake without soliciting the necessary feedback so
that  others  feel  bought  in.”  That  was  me  that  Per  was
describing!
There are strong benefits to Per’s inclusive consensual
style. His team felt deeply listened to, and by the time the
decisions  were  made,  everyone  was  in  agreement,  so
implementation was rapid. Yet from my own more top-down

perspective, I would have gladly traded group agreement
for the initial speed that goes with one person making a
decision.
THE JAPANESE RINGI SYSTEM:
HIERARCHICAL BUT ULTRA-CONSENSUAL
As we have seen, the United States and Germany are two
notable exceptions to the general pattern that egalitarian
cultures tend to have consensus decision-making processes,
while  hierarchical  cultures  tend  to  practice  top-down
decision  making.  But  the  really  remarkable  exception  is
Japan,  which  although  strongly  hierarchical  is  one  of  the
most  consensual  societies  in  the  world.  This  seemingly
paradoxical  pattern  grows  from  the  fact  that  both
hierarchical  systems  and  consensual  decision  making  are
deeply rooted in Japanese culture.
The Japanese pharmaceutical company Astellas has large
offices  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  Netherlands.  Jack
Sheldon, who attended one of the seminars I conducted for
Astellas,  kept  everyone  laughing  with  stories  about  his
mishaps  while  trying  to  work  with  Tokyo-based  senior
management.
“There  was  some  problem  with  a  new  product,  and  a
decision had to be made regarding whether to discontinue
its development and testing,” Sheldon explained.
A meeting was called at Tokyo headquarters at the
end of the month and, as I am an expert on the matter
and the decision would significantly impact my team’s
work, I was invited to attend. I felt very strongly that
the testing should continue, and I worked diligently
for three weeks to build up what I believed was a very
convincing  argument.  All  of  the  key  players  and
decision-makers would be at the meeting in Tokyo, so
I  understood  that  what  happened  during  those  few
hours would be critical. I prepared some slides for the

meeting and requested time on the agenda to make
my presentation.
When Sheldon arrived in the humidity and stifling August
heat of Tokyo, he felt well prepared. “I love Tokyo, from the
funny toilets that play music and squirt water at the press of
a  button  to  the  multiple  flavors  of  iced  canned  tea  and
coffee in the drink dispensers,” he observes. “But I wasn’t
really prepared for the cultural differences I found in the
meeting room.”
I found myself in a large conference room with eight
Japanese managers and two non-Japanese who were
old  hands  at  Astellas.  The  Japanese  welcomed  me
graciously with bows and business cards and smiles.
Everyone seemed to speak English well—a relief given
that I know only six words in Japanese.
One  of  the  Japanese  managers  gave  an  opening
presentation, and during his speech he presented an
argument followed by conclusions for why the testing
should  stop.  I  sensed  that  the  others  were  in
agreement with his comments. In fact, it seemed that
the  decision  had  already  been  finalized  within  the
group. I presented my slides still feeling that my point
of view would win out. But although people were very
polite, it was clear that the Japanese managers were
100 percent aligned against continued testing. I gave
all of my arguments and presented all of the facts, but
the group wouldn’t budge.
I felt a rush of frustration, which I managed with a
lot of difficulty not to display. I had spent all this time
preparing  my  argument  and  had  flown  across  the
world to meet with the group, yet discussing it with
them had no effect at all.
Sheldon  detailed  this  experience  to  our  class  with
exasperation. As several of the participants were Japanese, I

asked them to consider what might have happened and, if
possible, to offer advice to Sheldon.
After  a  coffee  break,  Susumi  Mori  provided  an
explanation as a spokesperson for the Japanese participants.
“In Japan, decisions tend to be made by group consensus
rather than by the individual,” Mori began. And he went on
to  explain  what  is  called  the ringi  system  of  decision
making. This is a management technique in which low-level
managers discuss a new idea among themselves and come
to a consensus before presenting it to managers one level
higher.
Mori put it this way:
During  discussions,  we  pass  around  a  proposal
document, the ringisho, which usually begins at the
mid-management  level.  When  the  proposal  reaches
each person, they read it, sometimes make changes or
suggestions, and then put their stamp of approval on
it. Once everyone has approved at one level, it passes
on to the next.
The next-higher-ranking managers then discuss the
new  idea  themselves  and  arrive  at  their  own
consensus. If they agree, they pass the approval to the
next  level.  This  process  continues  until  the  idea
reaches the highest management level and is or is not
implemented.  As  you  can  see,  the ringi  system  is
hierarchical,  bottom-up,  and  consensual  all  at  the
same time.
By the time the ringisho document has made the
rounds  and  received  everyone’s  seal,  all  the  people
involved  in  the  decision  have  had  a  chance  to  give
input and are in agreement.
At Astellas, the ringi process is actually managed by a
dedicated software program. The ringi system is often used
by large, traditional Japanese corporations for big decisions.
Even when the actual system is not used, decision making in

Japanese organizations will often follow a similar process,
with  proposals beginning  at  a  mid-level  of  management,
collecting group agreement, and then moving up to the next
hierarchical level for discussion. The end result is that the
responsibility is spread out among many individuals rather
than being concentrated with one or only a few.
2
Before  Japanese  company  members  sign  off  on  a
proposal, consensus building starts with informal, face-to-
face  discussions.  This  process  of  informally  making  a
proposal,  getting  input,  and  solidifying  support  is  called
nemawashi. Literally meaning “root-binding,” nemawashi is
a gardening term that refers to a process of preparing the
roots of a plant or tree for transplanting, which protects
them  from  damage.  Similarly, nemawashi  protects  a
Japanese   organization   from   damage   caused   by
disagreement or lack of commitment and follow-through.
With a longer, consensus-based decision-making process,
implementation  is  quicker.  Everyone  is  aware  of  the
decision, most people agree with it, and careful planning
has  already  taken  place.  When  different  groups  or
companies are involved, the long decision-making process
fosters  stronger  and  more  trusting  relationships.  On  the
other  hand,  critics  of  the ringi  system  contend  that  it  is
time-consuming,  allows  individual  managers  to  shirk
accountability, and by the time the decision has been made,
the  race  has  likely  been  lost  to  those  who  moved  more
quickly. “Some Japanese companies have moved away from
this  system,”  one  of  Mori’s  colleagues  explained,  “but  in
Astellas  we  use  a  software  product  which  manages  the
process.”
“What I learned from the experience,” Sheldon says, “is
that,  if  I  need  to  influence  people  at  our  Tokyo
headquarters,  I  need  to  get  involved  very  early  in  the
discussions and do my ‘root binding’ well before the actual
meeting.  The  more  I  can  discuss  the  issues  early  in  the
decision-making process, the more impact I can make. As
the consensus builds support and momentum, it becomes

very hard to go back on the group decision that has been
reached.”
The Japanese ringi  system  epitomizes  a  culture  where
decisions  take  a  long  time  to  be  made,  as  everyone  is
invested  in  building  a  group  consensus.  But  once  the
decision  is  made,  it  is  generally  fixed  and  the
implementation may be very rapid, because each individual
is on board. The result is a decision with a capital D.
AVOIDING CULTURE CLASHES WHEN MAKING
DECISIONS
Both  consensual  and  top-down  decision-making  processes
can be effective. But members of a global team often have
expectations about decision making based on the norms of
their own societies, which lead them to respond emotionally
to what they see as ineffective behaviors of others on the
team.  Worse  still,  most  of  us  are  not  even  aware  of  the
system  our  own  culture  uses  to  make  decisions.  We  just
follow the pattern without thinking about it—and this makes
our defensive reactions to alternative approaches even more
difficult to manage.
If you find yourself working with a team of people who
employ a more consensual decision-making process than the
one  you’re  accustomed  to,  try  applying  the  following
strategies:
• Expect  the  decision-making  process  to  take
longer  and  to  involve  more  meetings  and
correspondence.
• Do  your  best  to  demonstrate  patience  and
commitment throughout the process . . . even when
diverging  opinions  lead  to  seemingly  interminable
discussions and indecision.
• Check in with your counterparts regularly to show
your  commitment  and  be  available  to  answer
questions.

• Cultivate informal contacts within the team to help
you  monitor  where  the  group  is  in  the  decision-
making  process.  Otherwise,  you  may  find  that  a
consensus  is  forming  without  your  awareness  or
participation.
• Resist the temptation to push for a quick decision.
Instead, focus on the quality and completeness of the
information  gathered  and  the  soundness  of  the
reasoning  process.  Remember,  once  a  decision  is
made, it will be difficult to try to change it.
3
On the other hand, if you are working with a group of
people  who  favor  a  more  top-down  approach  to  decision
making, try using these techniques:
• Expect decisions to be made by the boss with less
discussion and less soliciting of opinions than you are
accustomed  to.  The  decision  may  be  made  before,
during,  or  after  a  meeting,  depending  on  the
organizational culture and the individual involved.
• Be ready to follow a decision even if your input
was not solicited or was overruled. It’s possible for a
project to produce success even if the initial plan was
not the best one that could have been devised.
• When you are in charge, solicit input and listen
carefully to differing viewpoints, but strive to make
decisions  quickly.  Otherwise  you  may  find  you  are
viewed as an indecisive or ineffective leader.
• When the group is divided about how to move
forward and no obvious leader is present, suggest a
vote. All members are expected to follow the decision
supported by the majority, even if they disagree.
• Remain  flexible  throughout  the  process.  Decisions
are rarely set in stone; most can later be adjusted,
revisited, or discussed again if necessary.

Finally,  if  you  are  working  with  a  global  team  that
includes  members  from  both  consensual  and  top-down
cultures,  you  can  avoid  problems  by  explicitly  discussing
and  agreeing  upon  a  decision-making  method  during  the
early  stages  of  your  collaboration.  Define  whether  the
decision will be made by vote or by the boss after a team
discussion.  Determine  whether  100  percent  agreement  is
needed,  whether  a  deadline  for  making  the  decision  is
necessary,  and  how  much  flexibility  there  will  be  for
changing  a  decision  after  the  deadline.  Later,  when  big
decisions must be made, revisit the decision-making process
to make sure it is generally understood and accepted.
We  used  this  approach  to  get  the  American/German
merger talks back on track. It took time to build a shared
awareness among the entire group about the differences in
interpretations,  habits,  and  perceptions  between  the
American and German decision-making systems. Everyone
was encouraged not to take themselves or their own style
too seriously. This enabled the team members to talk openly
about the problems and resolve them without acrimony.
In subsequent meetings, an American manager might be
heard  to  say,  “Great!  Decision  made!”  only  to  pause  and
clarify: “Decision with a small d, that is! We still need to run
this by our colleagues at home, so don’t start work on it just
yet!” And a German manager might conclude a discussion
by asking, “So, have we agreed on a decision? And does it
have a small d or a big D?”
The more both sides of the culture divide talked about it,
the  more  natural  it  became  for  them  to  adjust  to  one
another—and the more they enjoyed working together. As
with  so  many  challenges  related  to  cross-cultural
collaboration, awareness and open communication go a long
way toward defusing conflict.

6
The Head or the Heart
Two Types of Trust and How They
Grow
Gerdau  S.A.,  a  household  name  throughout  Brazil,  is  the
fourteenth-largest steelmaker in the world, with operations
in fourteen countries, including the United States and India.
It was founded by Joo Gerdau, a German immigrant who
moved to southern Brazil in 1869, and bought a nail factory
in Puerto Alegre in 1901. He passed the business on to his
son, Hugo Gerdau, who in turn passed it on to his son-in-
law, Curt Johannpeter, in 1946.
Recently, working with a group of Gerdau executives, I
heard firsthand the interesting backstory of one of Gerdau’s
recent acquisitions from Marina Morez, who headed up the
discussions  for  the  Brazilian  Gerdau  team,  and  from  her
American  counterpart  Jim  Powly.  The  acquisition  was  a
success, but the path there was full of interesting twists and
turns.
“The meetings started well,” said Morez, an exuberant
woman  in  an  elegant  beige  pants  suit.  “We  traveled  to

Jacksonville,  Mississippi,  and  Jim’s  team  gave  us  a  very
friendly  welcome.  We  got  right  down  to  business  that
morning.”  During  three  days  of  intense  and  sometimes
difficult negotiations, the group proceeded steadily through
the agenda, ordering in sandwiches for lunches and taking
only short pauses throughout the day. At around seven each
night, the exhausted group split up, the Americans heading
home and the Brazilians retiring to their hotels.
At the end of the two days, the American team felt great
about  all  they  had  accomplished.  The  discussions,  they
believed, were efficient and productive. The short lunches
and  tight  scheduling  signified  respect  for  the  time  the
Brazilians  invested  in  preparing  for  the  negotiations  and
traveling to an out-of-the-way location. The Brazilians, on
the other hand, were less upbeat and felt the meetings had
not gone as well as hoped. “Despite having spent two days
together,  we  didn’t  know  whether  we  could  trust  them,”
explained  Morez.  “They  were  certainly  organized  and
efficient. But we didn’t have a sense as to who they were
beyond that. We didn’t trust the Americans to deliver on
their promises, and we wondered if they would make good
partners.”
Powly,  who  seemed  to  tower  over  the  rest  of  us  even
when  seated,  continued  the  story.  “Next,  I  brought  the
American  team  to  Brazil  to  continue  the  discussions.”
Although the days were packed with meetings, the meals
were long—lunches were frequently well over an hour, and
dinners stretched into the late evening. The Brazilians took
this opportunity to share good food and conversation with
their American colleagues. “But we were uncomfortable,”
Powly remembers:
As the first lunch stretched on, we started looking at
our  watches  and  shifting  around  in  our  chairs.  We
were worried about how we were possibly going to
complete  what  we  needed  to  accomplish.  We
wondered in the middle of these socializing marathons

if the Brazilians were really taking these negotiations
seriously.
What  the  Americans  didn’t  understand  was  that  these
lunches and dinners symbolized something critical for the
Brazilians. “For us, this type of lunch is supposed to send a
clear  message,”  Morez  explained.  “Dear  colleagues,  who
have come such a long distance to work with us, we would
like to show you that we respect you—and even if nothing
else happens during these two days besides getting to know
each  other  at  a  deeper  level  and  developing  a  personal
connection and trust, we will have made very good use of
our time together.”
The sense of discomfort felt by these two groups begins
to show how differently Americans and Brazilians develop a
sense of trust for one another. Of course, trust is a critical
element of business in every country in the world. Whether
your home is a small village in the Malaysian mountains or a
glass-walled apartment atop a London skyscraper, you can’t
be successful if your colleagues, customers, partners, and
suppliers don’t trust you. But as the Gerdau merger story
suggests, the means by which trust is built among business
associates differ dramatically from one culture to another.
Powly and Morez managed to complete their deal without
ever  discovering  the  source  of  their  discomfort.  Nestlé’s
Karl  Morel,  who  found  himself  in  a  similarly  challenging
situation,  required  more  explicit  advice  to  improve  his
effectiveness when negotiating a joint venture in China.
An acquisitions expert from the German-speaking region
of  Switzerland,  Morel  led  a  negotiation  team  for
multinational  food  giant  Nestlé.  The  team  traveled  to
Shanghai  to  explore  a  potential  joint  venture  with  a
company specializing in packaged Chinese delicacies.
The  initial  meetings  with  eight  Chinese  executives
proved to be a baffling experience for Morel. While he and
his  colleagues tried  to  be  friendly  and  transparent,
providing all the business details the Chinese asked for, the

Chinese  seemed  closed  and  secretive.  “They  were
impenetrable.  They  were  tough  as  nails  and  unwilling  to
budge on any of their demands. That first week was one
uphill battle after another,” Morel recalls. Fortunately, after
the  first  frustrating  week,  Morel  and  his  colleagues  met
with  a  Chinese  business  consultant  who  pushed  them  to
rethink their approach:
When we contacted the Chinese consultant, we were
desperate. We had spent months identifying the best
possible group to partner with, flown 5,000 miles to
Shanghai, and invested a full week in meetings, but
we didn’t seem to be getting anywhere.
The  consultant  told  us  that  our  approach  was
wrong, that we were going too fast. We argued that
we had been very detailed, open, and patient. But the
consultant  was  clear  about  what  we  were  doing
wrong. He told us that we were not going to get what
we  wanted  from  the  Chinese  executives  unless  we
developed guanxi with them.
Guanxi? Morel and his team had never heard the word.
The consultant explained:
What I mean is that you should take the time, energy,
and effort to build a personal connection with them.
Build trust as a friend from the heart. Forget the deal
for a while. Go out. Enjoy some meals. Share some
drinks. Relax. Build an emotional connection. Open up
personally. Make a friend. A real one, the kind with
whom you are willing to let your guard down.
Morel and his colleagues took the consultant’s advice.
They  invited  their  Chinese  counterparts  for  a  dinner  one
evening  over  a  weekend,  bringing  together  people  from
several  hierarchical  levels  of  both  organizations.  The

evening was a great success. “We went to a restaurant on a
barge in the river,” Morel remembers:
There was live guitar music and huge amounts of food
from the Tianjin area of China, where the owner of the
other company came from. It was an excellent dinner,
during which we had time to socialize. We focused on
having fun, and we stopped talking about business.
The group toasted each other several times in a sign
of  mutual  respect  and  emphasized  how  glad  we  all
were to begin a long-term relationship. We laughed a
lot—and a few of us drank a lot.
We restarted the meetings the following Monday,
and the Chinese willingness to cooperate had changed
considerably.  They  were  now  very  enthusiastic  and
open, and we began to work well as a team. We were
able to make very good progress during our second
week in China.
Both  the  Swiss  and  the  Chinese  recognize  the
importance  of  trust  in  business  relationships—but  they
make  very  different  unconscious  assumptions  about  how
trust is created.
TRUST FROM THE HEAD, TRUST FROM THE
HEART
Make a quick mental list of five or six people you trust—
people from different areas of your life. The list may include
personal connections like your mother or your spouse, but
may also include a business partner, a client, or a supplier.
Then consider for a moment how the trust you feel for each
person was built. What events led you to trust them?
You might notice that the type of trust you feel for one
person is very different from the type of trust you feel for
another.  The  differences  can  be  complex,  but  one  simple

distinction is between two forms of trust: cognitive trust and
affective trust.
Cognitive  trust  is  based  on  the  confidence  you  feel  in
another  person’s  accomplishments,  skills,  and  reliability.
This  is  trust  that  comes  from  the  head.  It  is  often  built
through  business  interactions:  We  work  together,  you  do
your work well, and you demonstrate through the work that
you  are  reliable,  pleasant,  consistent,  intelligent,  and
transparent. Result: I trust you.
Affective trust, on the other hand, arises from feelings of
emotional  closeness,  empathy,  or  friendship.  This  type  of
trust  comes  from  the  heart.  We  laugh  together,  relax
together, and see each other at a personal level, so that I
feel affection or empathy for you and sense that you feel the
same for me. Result: I trust you.
Throughout  the  world,  friendships  and  personal
relationships  are  built  on  affective  trust.  If  you  were  to
consider  why  you  trust  your  mother  or  your  spouse,  you
would likely use descriptive explanations linked to affective
trust. But the source of trust in business relationships is a
little more complicated.
Roy  Chua,  a  professor  at  Harvard  Business  School,
surveyed  Chinese  and  American  executives  from  a  wide
range of industries, asking them to list up to twenty-four
important  members  of  their  professional  networks,  from
both  inside  and  outside  their  own  workplaces.  Then
participants were asked to indicate the extent to which they
felt comfortable going to each of these contacts to share
their  personal  problems  and  difficulties  as  well  as  their
hopes and dreams. “These items showed an affective-based
willingness  to depend  on  and  be  vulnerable  to  the  other
person.” Chua explains. Finally, participants were asked to
indicate the extent to which the contact could be relied on
to complete a task that he or she has agreed to do as well as
to have the knowledge and competence needed to get tasks
done.  These  items  captured  a  more  cognitive-based
willingness to depend on the other person.
1

The  survey  revealed  marked  differences  between  the
American  respondents  and  the  Chinese.  Chua  found  that
Americans, in business, draw a sharp dividing line between
cognitive  trust  and  affective  trust.  “This  finding  makes
sense given culture and history,” Chua explains. The United
States has “a long tradition of separating the practical and
emotional.  Mixing  the  two  is  perceived  as  unprofessional
and risks conflict of interest.”
Chinese managers, on the other hand, connect the two
forms of trust. As Chua puts it, “Among Chinese executives,
there is a stronger interplay between affective and cognitive
trust. Unlike Americans, Chinese managers are quite likely
to develop personal ties and affective bonds when there is
also a business or financial tie.” One consequence is that,
for  a  Chinese  manager  working  with  Americans,  the
culturally based preference to separate cognitive trust and
personal trust can indicate a lack of sincerity or loyalty.
During a research project I worked on with my longtime
collaborator  Elisabeth  Shen,  we  interviewed  Jing  Ren,  a
thirty-five-year-old Chinese sales manager, who was taken
aback  to  learn  how  little  a  personal  relationship  meant
when working in the United States. “In China,” Ren says, “if
we have lunch together, we can build a relationship that
leads to us working together. But here in Houston, it doesn’t
work like that.”
Ren hadn’t been looking to develop a friendship when he
bumped into Jeb Bobko at the gym:
I  was  working  out  on  the  rowing  machine  when  I
asked him what time it was. We started talking, and I
learned  that  he  was  preparing  for  an  upcoming
monthlong trip across China.
We had a great first connection, and he invited me
to his house for dinner several times with his wife and
children, and I invited him back. I got to know him
and his family well. We developed a great relationship.

Just  by  chance,  his  organization  was  a  potential
client for us, and I have to say that initially I thought
that was great luck. But when we started discussing
how  our  organizations  would  work  together,  I  was
taken aback to find that Jeb wanted to look at every
detail of the contract closely and negotiate the price
as if I was a stranger. He was treating me as if we had
no relationship at all.
In Ren’s culture, personal trust fundamentally shifts the
way  the  two  parties  conduct  business.  By  contrast,
American managers make a concerted effort to ensure that
personal relationships do not cloud the way they approach
business  interactions—in  fact,  they  often  deliberately
restrict affective closeness with people they depend on for
economic resources, such as budgeting or financing.
After  all,  in  countries  like  the  United  States  or
Switzerland, “business is business.” In countries like China
or Brazil, “business is personal.”
TASK-BASED VERSUS RELATIONSHIP-BASED
CULTURES
Of course, China and Brazil are not the only cultures where
affective and cognitive trust are mixed together in business
relationships.  On  the  Trusting  scale,  countries  are  rated
from  high  task-based  to  high  relationship-based  (Figure
6.1). The further a culture falls toward the task-based end of
the  scale,  the  more  people  from  that  culture  tend  to
separate affective and cognitive trust, and to rely mainly on
cognitive trust for work relationships. The further a culture
falls  toward  the  relationship-based  end  of  the  scale,  the
more  cognitive  and  affective  trust  are  woven  together  in
business.

FIGURE 6.1. TRUSTING
As  you  look  at  the  Trusting  scale  you  see  the  United
States  positioned  far  to  the  left  while  all  BRIC  countries
(Brazil, Russia, India, and China) fall far to the right. When
it comes to building trust, the center of gravity in the global
business  world  has  fundamentally  shifted  over  the  past
fifteen  years.  Previously,  managers  working  in  global
business may have felt themselves pulled toward working in
a  more  American  manner,  because  the  United  States
dominated  most  world  markets.  Building  trust  in  a  task-
based fashion was therefore one of the keys to international
success.  But  in  today’s  business  environment,  the  BRIC
cultures are rising and expanding their reach. At the same
time,  countries  in  the  southern  hemisphere such  as
Indonesia and Saudi Arabia are growing in global weight.

All of these countries lie markedly toward the relationship-
based end of the Trusting scale. Today if you are a manager
aiming for success at an international level and your work
brings you to the BRIC cultures or really anywhere in the
southern  hemisphere,  you  must  learn  how  to  build
relationship-based trust with your clients and colleagues in
order to be successful.
On  the  other  hand,  for  those  who  work  frequently  in
North America, you may be skeptical about the accuracy of
the United States on the left-hand side of the Trusting scale.
Are Americans really so task-based? What about the client
breakfasts, the golf outings, and the team-building activities
and  icebreaker  exercises  featured  at  so  many  American-
style training programs or conferences? Don’t these suggest
that  Americans  are  just  as  relationship-based  as  the
Brazilians or the Chinese?
Not  really.  Think  back  to  those  icebreaker  activities—
those two-to-three-minute exchanges designed to “build a
relationship”  between  complete  strangers.  What  happens
when the exercise is completed? Once the relationship is
built, the participants check it off the list and get down to
business—and at the end of the program, the relationships
that  were  so  quickly  built  are  usually  just  as  quickly
dropped.
What’s true in the training or conference center is true
outside of it. In task-based societies like the United States,
the  United  Kingdom,  and  Australia,  relationships  are
defined by functionality and practicality. It is relatively easy
to  move  in  and  out  of  networks,  and  if  a  business
relationship proves to be unsatisfactory to either party, it’s a
simple  matter  to  close  the  door  on  that  relationship  and
move into another.
By  contrast,  icebreaker  exercises  in  relationship-based
societies are rare. Relationships are built up slowly, founded
not  just on  professional  credibility  but  also  on  deeper
emotional connections—and after the relationship is built, it
is not dropped easily.

As an example, consider what happens when the boss
fires  someone  on  your  team.  Will  you  continue  your
relationship  with  the  person  who  has  been  fired  even
though he is no longer part of your company? Responses to
this question vary dramatically from one culture to another.
A Spanish executive working in an American firm told
me:
I  couldn’t  believe  the  way  my  American  colleagues
reacted when one of our team members lost his job.
That guy was our friend one day and out of our lives
the next. I asked my teammates—all of whom I respect
deeply—“When are we going to have a party for him,
meet him for drinks, tell him he is on our minds?”
They  looked  at  me  as  if  I  was  a  little  crazy.  They
seemed  to  feel,  since  he  was  underperforming,  we
could just push him off the boat and pretend we never
cared about him. For a Spaniard, this is not an easy
thing to accept.
If  a  Spanish  manager  finds  the  American  attitude
strange, a Chinese manager is likely to find it unthinkable.
John  Trott,  a  Canadian  working  in  pharmaceuticals  and
living  in  Shanghai,  explains,  “In  China,  business
relationships are personal relationships. The loyalty is to the
individual and not to the company. If someone leaves the
company, the personal relationship would be much stronger
than  the  severance  between  that  person  and  the
organization.”
The ramifications for someone managing a Chinese team
are  immediately  apparent.  If  you  fire  a  salesperson,  the
client who had a relationship with him may also choose to
leave. Likewise, if you fire a sales manager who has strong
affective trust with his team members, the best are likely to
follow him to his new company.
This difference between the way Americans react to a
firing and the way those from relationship-based cultures

react underscores the reality that Americans are, in fact,
highly  task-based—no  matter  how  many  “relationship
building”  exercises  they  may  perform  at  conferences  or
seminars.
PEACH VS. COCONUT: FRIENDLY DOES NOT
EQUAL RELATIONSHIP-BASED
Just  as  it  is  easy  to  misinterpret  the  reason  for  an
icebreaker  activity,  it’s  easy  to  mistake  certain  social
customs of Americans that might suggest strong personal
connections  where  none  are  intended.  For  example,
Americans are more likely than those from many cultures to
smile at strangers and to engage in personal discussions
with  people  they  hardly  know.  Others  may  interpret  this
“friendliness”  as  an  offer  of  friendship.  Later,  when  the
Americans don’t follow through on their unintended offer,
those other cultures often accuse them of being “fake” or
“hypocritical.”
Igor  Agapova,  a  Russian  colleague  of  mine,  tells  this
story about his first trip to the United States:
I sat down next to a stranger on the airplane for a
nine-hour  flight  to  New  York.  This  American  began
asking  me  very  personal  questions:  did  I  have  any
children, was it my first trip to the U.S., what was I
leaving behind in Russia? And he began to also share
very personal information about himself. He showed
me pictures of his children, told me he was a bass
player,  and  talked  about  how  difficult  his  frequent
traveling was for his wife, who was with his newborn
child right now in Florida.
In response, Agapova started to do something that was
unnatural  for  him  and  unusual  in  Russian  culture—he
shared  his  personal  story  quite  openly  with  this  friendly
stranger,  thinking  they  had  built  an  unusually  deep

friendship in a short period of time. The sequel was quite
disappointing:
I thought that after this type of connection, we would
be  friends  for  a  very  long  time.  When  the  airplane
landed, imagine my surprise when, as I reached for a
piece  of  paper  in  order  to  write  down  my  phone
number, my new friend stood up and with a friendly
wave  of  his  hand  said,  “Nice  to  meet  you!  Have  a
great trip!” And that was it. I never saw him again. I
felt he had purposely tricked me into opening up when
he  had  no  intention  of  following  through  on  the
relationship he had instigated.
Kurt  Lewin
2
  was  one  of  the  first  social  scientists  to
explain individual personality as being partially formed by
the cultural system in which a person was raised. Authors
Fons  Trompenaars  and  Charles  Hampden-Turner  later
expanded  on  Lewin’s  model  to  explain  how  different
cultures  have  different  layers  of  information  that  they
divulge publicly or reserve for private relationships.
3
 These
models are frequently referred to as the peach and coconut
models of personal interaction.
In  peach  cultures  like  the  United  States  or  Brazil,  to
name  a  couple,  people  tend  to  be  friendly  (“soft”)  with
others  they  have  just  met.  They  smile  frequently  at
strangers,  move  quickly  to  first-name  usage,  share
information about themselves, and ask personal questions of
those they hardly know. But after a little friendly interaction
with a peach person, you may suddenly get to the hard shell
of the pit where the peach protects his real self. In these
cultures, friendliness does not equal friendship.
When  conducting  a  workshop  in  Brazil,  one  of  the
German participants who had been living in Rio de Janeiro
for a year explained,

People  are  so  friendly  here.  It  is  unbelievable.  You
might  be  buying  groceries  or  simply  crossing  the
street.  People  ask  you  questions,  speak  about  their
families, and they are constantly inviting you over for
a  cup  of  coffee  or  suggesting  that  they’ll  see  you
tomorrow  on  the  beach.  At  the  beginning  I  felt  so
happy to receive so many invitations of friendship. But
it  didn’t  take  long  for  me  to  realize  that  all  those
people who invite me over for coffee keep forgetting
to  tell  me  where  they  live  and  those  constant
suggestions that we’ll meet on the beach the next day
simply  never  materialize.  Because  the  beach  is,  of
course, many miles long.
In  Minnesota,  where  I  was  raised,  we  learn  at  a  very
young  age  to  smile  generously  at  people  we’ve  just  met.
That’s  one  characteristic  of  a  peach  culture.  A
Frenchwoman who visited with my family was taken aback
by  Minnesota’s  “peachiness.”  “The  waiters  here  are
constantly smiling and asking me how my day is going! They
don’t even know me. It makes me feel uncomfortable and
suspicious.  What  do  they  want  from  me?  I  respond  by
holding tightly on to my purse.”
On the other hand, coming from a peach culture as I do, I
was equally taken aback when I came to live in Europe. My
friendly smiles and personal comments were greeted with
such  cold  formality  by  the  Polish,  French,  German,  or
Russian colleagues I was just beginning to know. I took their
stony  expressions  as  signs  of  arrogance,  perhaps  even
hostility.
In  coconut  cultures  such  as  these,  people  are  more
closed (like the tough shell of a coconut) with those they
don’t have friendships with. They rarely smile at strangers,
ask  casual  acquaintances  personal  questions,  or  offer
personal information to those they don’t know intimately. It
takes a while to get through the initial hard shell, but as you
do,  people  will  become  gradually  warmer  and  friendlier.

While  relationships  are  built  up  slowly,  they  tend  to  last
longer.
When you travel to a coconut culture, the receptionist at
the company you are visiting will not ask, “What did you do
this weekend?” and the hairdresser who is cutting your hair
for the first time will not remark, “An American married to a
Frenchman? How did you meet your husband?” If you are a
peach person traveling in a coconut culture, be aware of the
Russian saying “If we pass a stranger on the street who is
smiling, we know with certainty that that person is crazy . . .
or  else  American.”  If  you  enter  a  room  in  Moscow  (or
Belgrade, Prague, or even Munich or Stockholm) and find a
group of solemn-looking managers who make no effort to
chat, do not take this as a sign that the culture does not
value relationship building. On the contrary, it is through
building a warm personal connection over time that your
coconut-culture  counterparts  will  become  trusting,  loyal
partners.
The  point,  of  course,  is  that  different  cultures  have
different social cues that mark appropriate behavior with
strangers as opposed to cues that indicate a real friendship
is  developing.  People  from  both  task-based  cultures  and
relationship-based cultures may be affable with strangers,
but  this  characteristic  does  not  in  itself  indicate  either
friendship or relationship orientation.
STRATEGIES FOR BUILDING TRUST ACROSS
CULTURAL DIVIDES
As a general rule of thumb, investing extra time developing
a  relationship-based  approach  will  pay  dividends  when
working with people from around the world. This is true
even if you both come from task-based cultures, such as the
United States and Germany. Once an affective relationship
is established, the forgiveness for any cultural missteps you
make comes a lot easier. So when you work internationally,
no matter who you are working with, investing more time in

building affective trust is a good idea. But knowing exactly
how to build affective trust may not always be so obvious.
One productive way to start putting trust deposits in the
bank  is  by  building  on  common  interests.  Wolfgang
Schwartz, from Austria, used this simple way of connecting
with people to great success during two decades of work in
Russia. “When I retired and left Moscow,” he said, “I was
replaced by a younger Austrian colleague, Peter Geginat,
who had an extraordinary track record in Austria but knew
nothing about how people outside of Austria work. His task-
based  approach  was  effective  for  Austria,  but  not  at  all
suited for Russia.”
Geginat  worked  diligently  for  months  to  close  an
attractive deal with a potential client. He invested countless
hours in making his presentation outstanding, his brochures
polished, and his offer generous and transparent. Yet the
client dragged his feet, and, six months into the process, his
interest seemed to be dwindling. At this point, the young
Geginat called Schwartz up and asked for advice, given the
latter’s success during all those years in Russia.
Schwartz  came  to  Moscow  and  met  directly  with  the
client:
The first thing I noticed when I saw him was that he
was  about  my  age—we  both  have  white  hair.  So  I
spoke of my family, and we spent the first half hour
talking  about  our  grandchildren.  Then  I  noticed  he
had a model of a fighter plane on his desk. I also flew
planes in the military, and I saw this as an incredible
opportunity. We spent the next hour talking about the
differences between various military planes.
At this point, the Russian client signaled that he
had to leave. But he invited me to go with him to the
ballet that evening. Now, in truth, I dislike the ballet.
But  I’m  not  stupid.  When  an  opportunity  this  good
comes  along,  I  jump  on  it.  The  evening  went

beautifully and ended in a drink with the client and his
wife.
At 10:00 a.m. the next day, Schwartz met again with the
client,  who  said,  “I’ve  looked  through  your  proposal,  I
understand your situation, and I agree with your terms. I
have to get someone else to sign the contract, but if you
would like to take the plane back to Austria today I will fax
you  the  signed  contract  this  afternoon.”  When  Schwartz
arrived at his office in Austria the next Monday morning, the
€2  million  down  payment  was  already  in  his  account.
Schwartz was able to accomplish more in twenty-four hours
with  a  relationship-based  approach  than  his  task-based
colleague was able to accomplish in six months.
You might protest that Schwartz was remarkably lucky.
Just  by  chance,  he  happened  to  have  several  things  in
common  with  his  Russian  client,  from  grandchildren  to
fighter planes, and in fact, Schwartz did end his account by
exclaiming,  “It  was  my  white  hair  that  saved  me!”  But
Schwartz found these similarities because he was looking
for them.
If  you  are  working  with  someone  from  a  relationship-
based culture and opportunities for a personal connection
don’t jump out at you, it is worth the investment to look a
little  harder—as  Italian  Alberto  Gaiani  found  when  he
worked with a team of young software engineers based in
Mumbai, India.
“I  couldn’t  imagine  what  we  could  possibly  have  in
common,”  Gaiani  told  me.  “I  was  well  aware  from  past
experiences  that,  in  order  to  manage  a  team  of  Indians
effectively,  it  is  absolutely  critical  to  develop  a  good
relationship with them.” But Gaiani had two challenges. The
bigger  challenge  was  the  fact  that  he  couldn’t  travel
because  of  budget  cuts.  The  smaller  was  his  personal
background, so strikingly different from that of his Indian
team members. As Gaiani explained,

I am forty-six years old with four children. My life is
homework  and  diapers  and  weekend  trips  to
grandma’s house. But one thing I do love is music. I
listen to music in the car, in the shower, while I’m
working.  Classical,  rock,  you  name  it.  So  then  it
occurred  to  me,  why  not  use  Indian  pop  music  to
make a connection?
I Googled “Indian pop music what’s hot.” Then I
spent two hours listening to the top songs that came
up on YouTube and getting a feel for the rhythms and
beats. For the song I liked the best, I sent my Indian
staff a link. “Do you know this song?” I asked them.
“Do  you  love  it  like  I  do?”  They  responded  with  a
resounding  “NO,  we  don’t  like  that  song—are  you
kidding?” “This is my twelve-year-old sister’s favorite
song! You can do better than that!” one of them told
me. And then they sent me links to the songs they
liked.  I  created  a  great  dialogue  with  them  over
something  that  was  very  interesting  to  all  of  us
personally.
The time it took for Gaiani to investigate which songs
were hot in Mumbai paid off in myriad intangible ways. As
he says, “In the past I have often had the experience with
Indian  employees  such that,  if  you  don’t  develop  a  good
personal  relationship  with  them,  they  will  tell  you
everything is okay even if the entire project has gone up in
flames. Once the relationship is built, loyalty and openness
comes with it.”
What  makes  Gaiani’s  example  particularly  powerful  is
that he managed to do all this relationship building without
ever meeting with his staff face-to-face. This, of course, is
the reality that many of us face today. We work with people
in countries on the opposite side of the planet, knowing very
little about their cultural context. This makes relationship
building more difficult, but no less important.

SHOWING YOUR TRUE SELF: THE
RELATIONSHIP IS THE CONTRACT
Picture this situation: You are on a business trip, and after a
full day of formal meetings, a potential client has invited you
out to dinner. As drinks are served and delicious smells roll
out of the kitchen, how do you feel?
Careful  to  maintain  your  professional  composure.  You
want to be certain that you don’t drink too much or let down
your guard and make a bad impression. You are friendly,
attentive, and trying to connect with the client, but careful
to put your best foot forward at all times.

Or
Ready to let go. You have been focused on business all
day  long—now  is  the  time  to  have  some  fun,  develop
friendships, show who you are outside of a business setting,
and get to know others beyond their work personas. You
share drinks, open up, and relax without concern.
As my roots are in a task-based culture and I worked for
the first several years of my career in the United States, my
assumption was that the first scenario—caution—is the most
proper answer.  My  strong  belief  was  that  when  among
people who could have any impact on my business success—
not  just  clients  but  colleagues  and  other  associates—I
should  always  show  the  best  “me”  possible.  The  ditzy,
forgetful “me” who loses her keys and forgets her purse at
restaurants—not to mention the fun-loving, noisy “me” who
often talks more than she listens and has lots of accidental-
bad-mother stories to report—should be reserved for family
and friends.
But time and experience have taught me that the second
scenario, show your nonprofessional self, is often the better
approach when working with relationship-based cultures. I
initially learned this lesson when working with Repsol, the
Spanish  oil  giant.  Ricardo  Bartolome,  who  worked  on  a
global  team  in  the  company’s  Texas  office,  gave  me  this
valuable insight:
One of the aspects I find so difficult about working
with  Americans  is  that,  although  they  are  very
friendly, sometimes surprisingly so, they don’t show
you  who  they  really  are  in  a  business  relationship.
They  are  so  politically  correct.  They  don’t  dare
complain or show negative emotion.
In Spanish culture, we put a strong value on the
importance  of  being authentico,  and  we  perceive
Americans  as  not  authentic.  You  can  work  with  an
American  supplier  for  years  and  hear  all  about  his
family, his weekends, his children, but everything is

wrapped  up  in  a  package  of  positivity  that  we
Europeans feel is impenetrable.
My colleagues call Americans superficial and fake,
but I don’t see it that way. I think they are just very,
very careful to not show business counterparts who
they really are. In either case, it makes it hard for us
to trust them.
Bartolome’s  comments  got  me  thinking  about  the
downside of maintaining a “professional” demeanor in all
my interactions with business acquaintances. Another mind-
shifter  for  me  was  a  conversation  with  Ted  Krooner,  an
American  whose  work  brought  him  frequently  to  Latin
America. Krooner complained:
I just get so exhausted on those trips to Mexico. After
a long day of meetings, we go out to a restaurant and
then out for more drinks. I can hang on for an hour, or
an hour and a half. But the evenings drag on and on.
They are drinking and laughing, really having a great
time . . . but I feel like my head is about to hit the
table. I just can’t concentrate any longer.
I  sympathized  with  Krooner,  having  felt  the  same  way
during my own evenings with business associates in Latin
America.  But  as  I  reflected  on  his  words,  I  began  to
recognize in Krooner what I hadn’t really understood about
myself.  Krooner  felt  exhausted  after  a  night  of  partying
because  “he  couldn’t  concentrate  any  longer.”  But  his
relationship-based colleagues had left concentration behind
when they entered the restaurant.
The best strategy in this situation is to join the crowd.
When  working  in  a  relationship-based  culture  such  as
Mexico,  the  moment  you  switch  from  boardroom  to
restaurant or bar is the moment you need to begin acting as
if  you  are  out  on  the  town  with  your  best  friends.  Don’t
worry about saying or doing the wrong thing. Be yourself—

your personal self, not your business self. Dare to show that
you  have  nothing  to  hide,  and  the  trust—and  likely  the
business—will follow.
Of course, a focus on keeping a professional persona isn’t
the only reason task-based people find it hard to adjust to
relationship-based  cultures.  Investing  hours  in  building
affective trust can seem time-consuming and wasteful. In
the words of a Danish oil executive who had recently moved
to Lagos, Nigeria, “Who has time? Of course we all know
that  relationship  building  is  key  in  Nigeria,  but  I’m  very
busy.  If  I  spend  the  time  and  energy  necessary  to  build
affective trust with my Nigerian suppliers, I simply won’t
have time to get my job done.”
It’s  an  understandable  complaint—and  it  raises  an
obvious question: Why do people in cultures like Nigeria,
India,  or  Argentina  invest  so  much  time  in  relationship
building?  Is  it  simply  that  they  are  inefficient  or  prefer
socializing to working?
There  is,  in  fact,  a  very  clear,  practical  benefit  to
investing in affective relationship building—especially when
working in emerging markets. This brings us back to the
business value of trust.
Suppose  you  are  the  Danish  owner  of  a  business  that
designs  women’s  purses.  You  sell  two  hundred  purses
wholesale to a shop that has just opened on the other side of
Copenhagen.  You  give  the  retailer  the  purses,  and  he
promises to pay you next week. How do you know you are
going to get your money?
The answer, of course, is that the shop owner signed a
contract promising to pay you. If he doesn’t pay, you can
take him to court. Having a signed agreement in a culture
with a consistently reliable legal system makes it possible to
do business easily with people you don’t trust or even know.
Now imagine the same situation—only this time you are
Nigerian and designing women’s purses in Lagos. The legal
system  in  Nigeria  is  less  reliable  than  the  one  found  in
countries such as Denmark, the United Kingdom, and the

United States. You can sign a contract, but there is no way
of enforcing it if the payment doesn’t come through.
The  only  way  you  feel  assured  that  you’ll  be  paid  in
countries  like  Nigeria  is  the  trust  you  have  in  the  other
person. Perhaps he has done business with your brother for
years  and  your  brother  vouches  for  him;  perhaps  you’ve
worked with his cousins or close friends on other projects;
or perhaps you’ve had time to get to know him personally
and you’ve concluded that he is trustworthy. You believe you
can  do  business  with  the  shopkeeper  because  your
relationship with him (direct or indirect) provides a safety
net  that  replaces  the  role  of  the  legal  system  in  more
developed countries.
For this reason, investing time in establishing trust will
often save time (and many other resources) in the long run.
And  a  similar  way  of  thinking  continues  to  exist  in
relationship-based cultures that are also blessed with solidly
reliable legal structures, such as Japan and France.
So if you find yourself wondering in exasperation, “Why
do I have to spend so much time dining and socializing with
potential clients? Why can’t we just get down to business
and  sign  a  contract?”  remember—in  many  cultures,  the
relationship is your contract. You can’t have one without the
other.
CONSIDER MEALS CAREFULLY: LUNCH MAY BE
YOUR TICKET
How you organize and conduct your lunches and dinners
when  collaborating  with  people  from  other  cultures  can
communicate volumes—often unintentionally, as I found out
from  an  e-mail  I  received  from  Guillermo  Nuñez,  an
Argentine executive with a global wine distributor:
Last year, I had a strange experience when some of
my  colleagues  and  I  visited  one  of  our  bulk  wine
customers in Norway. I was giving a presentation to

these Norwegians about our Argentinean office, and
explaining  the  challenges  that  we  had  crossing  the
fjords with our container boats. Up until that point, I
thought that the presentation was going well.
Then one of the Norwegians interrupted me, in a
very  polite  way,  just  to  inform  me  that  they  had
ordered some sandwiches and drinks to have during
the meeting. I was really surprised. This signaled to
me that they were not interested in what I was saying.
Never  in  my  thirty  years  of  working  across  Latin
America had something like this happened to me.
I was confused about what to do. Should I continue
to talk although they clearly were interested in eating
their sandwiches? I did finish my presentation, but I
felt completely stupid speaking while they were eating
their lunch.
After the meeting, I spoke to my Norwegian-based
colleague about what I’d felt had been a disastrous
hour. He told me that I had misunderstood and that
the  situation  was  very  normal.  He  explained  that
Norwegians  often  do  this  just  to  optimize  time.  He
said it was a sign of respect for our time, which they
would like to invest wisely.
Nuñez actually assumed that his colleague from Norway
was  simply  trying  to  spare  his  feelings.  Not  until  he
attended  a  program  I  conducted  and  spoke  about  cross-
cultural trust building did he discover that his lunchtime
“disaster” was really just a case of crossed signals.
The good news is that strategies for improving trust are
quite simple, often requiring only a few minor adjustments
in your expectations and behaviors.
The first strategy is easy. If you are from a task-based
society and are hosting people from a more relationship-
based  society,  put more  time  and  effort  into  organizing
meals to be shared. During these meals, spend time getting
to  know  your  collaborators  personally  rather  than

discussing business. And if you are visiting a relationship-
based culture, don’t mistake a long lunch for a waste of
time. If you use this time to develop a personal connection
and a little affective trust, it may end up being the most
important part of the business trip.
For  those  from  relationship-based  societies  who  are
hosting task-based guests, don’t throw out the socializing
altogether. Go ahead and organize a one-hour lunch, which
they will most certainly appreciate. But if the meal is likely
to stretch on to ninety minutes or longer, explain this in
advance. And feel free to invite your task-based colleagues
out in the evening—but if one of them chooses to go back to
the hotel to get some rest or catch up on e-mails, don’t take
offense. This is a normal and appropriate response in a task-
based culture.
Sharing meals is a meaningful tool for trust building in
nearly all cultures. But in some cultures, sharing drinks—
particularly alcoholic drinks—is equally important.
I  once  conducted  a  training  program  for  a  German
couple  moving  to  Japan,  assisted  by  Hiroki,  a  wise  and
entertaining Japanese culture specialist. The German asked
Hiroki how to get his Japanese colleagues to tell him what
was really going on: “They are so formal and quiet. I worry
if I am not able to build the necessary trust, I won’t get the
information I need from them.”
Hiroki thought quietly for a moment and then responded
with only a small trace of humor in his eyes: “Best strategy
is to drink with them.”
“To drink?” the German client questioned.
“Yes, drink until you fall down.”
When Hiroki said this, I thought back to my first-ever
ride  in  the  Tokyo  metro,  when  I  saw  several  groups  of
Japanese  businessmen stumbling  through  the  station  as
they traveled home after a long evening of well-lubricated
socializing.  I  now  realized  they  were  following  Hiroki’s
advice—quite literally.

If you look at Japan on the Trusting scale, you will see
that it is a relationship-based culture, though not as far to
the right as China or India. During the day, the Japanese
generally take a task-based approach—but the relationship
building  that  happens  in  the  evening  can  be  critical  to
business success.
In Japanese culture, where group harmony and avoiding
open  conflict  are  overriding  goals,  drinking  provides  an
opportunity  to  let  down  your  hair  and  express  your  real
thoughts. Drinking is a great platform for sharing your true
inner feelings (what are called honne rather than tatemae
feelings) as well as for recognizing where bad feelings or
conflict  might  be  brewing  and  to  strive  to  address  them
before  they  turn  into  problems.  Under  no  circumstances
should the discussions of the night before be mentioned the
next  day.  Drinking  alcohol  is  therefore  an  important
Japanese bonding ritual not only with clients, but also within
one’s own team.
Many  Japanese  use  drinking  to  forge  connections,  as
captured  by  the  bilingual  expression nomunication,
stemming  from  the  Japanese  verb nomu  (“to  drink”).
Japanese  salespeople  frequently  woo  their  clients  over
drinks, knowing that although explicit deal making is never
done during this type of socializing, a deal is rarely won
without it. Of course, drinking to build trust is not just a
Japanese  custom.  Across  East  Asia,  whether  you  are
working in China, Thailand, or Korea, doing a substantial
amount of drinking with customers and collaborators is a
common step in the trust-building process.
Many people from task-based cultures don’t get it. “Why
would I risk making a fool of myself in front of the very
people I need to impress?” they wonder. But that is exactly
the point. When you share a round of drinks with a business
partner, you show that person you have nothing to hide. And
when they “drink until they fall down” with you, they show
you that they are willing to let their guard down completely.
“Don’t  worry  about  looking  stupid,”  Hiroki  reassured  our

German  manager,  who  had  begun  wringing  his  hands
nervously.  “The  more  you  are  willing  to  remove  social
barriers  in  the  evening,  the  more  they  will  see  you  as
trustworthy.”
Alcohol  is  not  the  only  way  to  build  a  business
relationship. If you don’t drink, you can certainly find other
ways to partake in the fun; in Japan, a round of karaoke or a
trip to the spa can do wonders. And in Arab cultures, where
alcohol is avoided, you can forget beer and relax instead
over a cup of tea.
CHOOSE YOUR COMMUNICATION MEDIUM:
PHONE, E-MAIL, OR WASTA
Of  course,  in  today’s  global  business  world,  not  all
relationships  provide  the  opportunity  for  face-to-face
sharing over a meal or a drink. A lot of trust building must
take place long-distance. Most of us send an e-mail or pick
up  the  telephone  without  giving  culture  much  thought.
However,  putting  a  little  effort  into  the  choice  can  help
tremendously  when  you  need  to  build  trust  with  your
globally-dispersed colleagues.
If you are working with people from a task-based society,
go ahead and choose the medium that is the most efficient,
if  that  is  your  preference.  E-mail,  telephone,  face-to-face
meetings—all  are  acceptable,  so  long  as  the  message  is
communicated clearly and succinctly.
But when starting to work with those from a relationship-
based society, begin by choosing a communication medium
that is as relationship-based as possible. Instead of sending
an e-mail, make the extra effort to pick up the phone. Better
still, if you have the budget as well as the time, take the
trip. And don’t pack your day with task-based meetings and
expect to escape to your hotel in the evening. Organize your
time  in  order  to  communicate  as  much  as  possible  in
informal  settings.  Once  you  have  built  a  good  trusting

relationship, you can move to a more task-based medium
like e-mail.
E-mail  can  be  particularly  problematic  when  you  are
trying to make a connection with a person you don’t know.
In task-based cultures, it is quite common to e-mail people
you’ve never met. However, in relationship-based cultures,
people often don’t respond to e-mails from someone with
whom they have no prior relationship.
One strategy, if you need to contact someone you don’t
know,  is  to  use  what  in  Arabic  is  called wasta,  which
translates loosely to mean something like “connections that
create preference,” “relationships that give you influence,”
or “who you know.” Dana Al-Hussein, a Jordanian manager
working for L’Oréal, explains the concept:
A  good  personal  relationship  is  the  single  most
important  factor  when  doing  business  with  people
from the Arab world. If you don’t have a relationship,
don’t resort to e-mailing strangers out of the blue. Use
your  network  to  find  a wasta—someone  who  has  a
relationship with the person you need to contact, and
ask that person to make a quick call introducing you
personally. A friend of a friend can work wonders in
establishing a first step to a personal connection.
If you take this approach, you are likely to find your e-
mails answered rapidly.
Furthermore, whether using phone, e-mail, or working
face-to-face, think carefully about the amount of time you
will devote to social talk before getting down to business.
In just about every culture, when you make a phone call,
you  are  likely  to  start  with  a  period  of  social  talk.  What
differs  from  culture  to  culture  is  how  many  minutes  you
spend chatting before moving to business. As a general rule,
the  more  relationship-based  the  society,  the  more  social
conversation surrounds the task. While an Australian may
invest a minute or so in personal talk with a colleague, a

Mexican is much more likely to spend several long minutes
on the social preliminaries before getting down to business.
In  strongly  relationship-based  societies,  such  as  many
African and Middle Eastern cultures, the balance of social
talk to business talk may tip heavily to the former. Sheldon
Blake learned this well after years of working among Saudis
in Jeddah:
If  I  need  to  discuss  business  with  a  Saudi  Arabian
client or contact who I haven’t spoken to in a while, I
will make a call today just to reestablish the social
connection.  It  would  be  embarrassing,  and  my
counterpart  would  likely  feel  it  abrupt  or
inappropriate, for me to call to discuss business, given
that we haven’t spoken in a while. After we have had a
good chat and have reestablished a social connection,
then I can call again a few days later and this time
introduce  the  business  task.  This  is  considered  a
respectful approach in the Saudi culture.
When in doubt, the best strategy may be to simply let the
other person lead. Relax, put your feet up, and start the call
with the idea that you might spend several long minutes just
catching up before the business talk starts. And then let the
other  person  decide  when enough  is  enough.  Initiate  the
social, ignore your gut reaction, and listen for their cues.
As  with  phone  calls,  the  standard  amount  of  social
content included in an e-mail also differs from one culture to
another. If you come from a culture where a lot of social
content is the norm, your task-based colleagues may feel as
if you are hemming and hawing down the page. If you come
from a culture where people jump right to business content,
your e-mails can come across as rude or even aggressive.
Just as when you are on the phone, follow the other person’s
lead. Research suggests that the more you mimic the other
person’s e-mail style, the more likely your collaborator is to
respond positively to you.
4

Jaroslav Bokowski, a Polish manager who worked in the
IT  department  of  the  French  multinational  Saint  Gobain,
gave  me  this  simple  and  effective  example  as  to  how  to
follow this rule:
When I went to present at a conference in India, I
noticed that, when the Indian organizers e-mailed me,
there  was  always  a  short  and  friendly  yet  formal
preamble, such as, “Greetings of the day. I hope this
mail finds you in best of health and spirits.” Well, in
Poland, we certainly wouldn’t begin an e-mail in this
manner, but I thought “Why not?” and responded in
kind.
When  you  are  working  face-to-face,  socializing  before
getting  down  to  business  may  come  more  naturally  then
when communication via phone or e-mail. But when you are
busy and trying to figure out how to spend your precious
moments, understanding when to invest in a long, friendly
discussion and when to get right down to business is key.
You might think you are saving a few minutes by cutting out
the chitchat, only to find out later that a lot of time has been
wasted because you didn’t establish the appropriate social
connection up front.
I had one entertaining example of this while running the
first of many sessions for a group of senior executives from
the New York Stock Exchange Euronext. When I described
the Trusting scale, Sarah Teebone, one of the most senior
women  in  the  company,  began  loudly  calling  out,  “Ding,
ding, ding!” I turned to Teebone, and she explained in a
strong New York accent:
Bells are ringing in my head. I just now understood
something that has happened several times over the
last two years. On several occasions, managers from
our  French  and  Portuguese  offices  have  requested
one-on-one meetings with me while they are in New

York. But then, when they arrive in my office, they
don’t have anything specific they need to talk about.
After a minute or two of social talk, I start to wonder
why  they  wanted  to  meet  with  me,  and  on  several
occasions I have asked, “What can I do for you?” To
which they’ve replied, “I just wanted to say hello and
get to know you, as we will be working together in the
future.”
I try to be cordial. But I admit that I am thinking,
“Well, okay. Here I am. Feel free to let me know if you
need something. Now if you don’t mind I have a few
calls I need to make.”
Later, when e-mailing employees in Paris, I have
often had the experience that people don’t respond to
my  e-mails.  I  hadn’t  made  the  connection,  but  in
considering  it  now,  I  realize  that  this  happens  only
when  I  haven’t  established  a  relationship  with  that
person.
Teebone laughed: “The next time I take a trip to Europe I
am going to set up a few ‘Just to get to know you’ meetings
and see what happens.”
The chances are good that Teebone will discover that the
time  she  devotes  to  “just  saying  hello”  to  her  European
colleagues  will  pay  dividends  the  next  time  she  has  a
business problem she needs help addressing. Trust is like
insurance—it’s an investment you need to make up front,
before the need arises.

7
The Needle, Not the Knife
Disagreeing Productively
One of my childhood memories is listening with my family to
the  popular  American  radio  show,  Garrison  Keillor’s A
Prairie Home Companion. Keillor’s deep baritone voice is
still  heard  Saturday  afternoons  on  hundreds  of  National
Public Radio stations as he makes gentle fun of Minnesotans
(and just about everyone else).
For years, one of the regular skits on Keillor’s show was
about  the  French  chef,  Maurice,  the  proprietor  of  the
mythical Café Boeuf, who sees any customer as a potential
verbal sparring partner. My favorite sketch involves Keillor
calling to make a reservation at the Café Boeuf, only to be
questioned  vigorously  by  Maurice  (in  a  ridiculously  fake
French  accent,  of  course).  What  will  Keillor  be  wearing?
How can Maurice be sure that Keillor’s tie will work with
the restaurant’s wallpaper? The more Keillor explains his
sartorial choices, the more passionately Maurice questions
and challenges him. It was through these sketches that I
was  first  introduced  to  the  image  of  the  French  as
inveterate debaters.

When I moved to France, this stereotype was echoed in
the daily news. Strikes and demonstrations seemed to be
part of the social fabric, triggered by everything from an
increase in college tuition to a proposed change in pension
plans.  But  I  really  didn’t  experience  the  French  love  of
debate on a personal level until one evening when I was
invited with my (French) husband Eric to a dinner party at
the  home  of  Hélène  Durand,  a  friend  from  Eric’s  school
days.
Hélène and her husband lived near a golf course west of
Paris. There were four couples around the table. All were
French, except for me. As the dinner progressed, the group
was laughing and getting along beautifully, with Hélène and
her  best  friend  Juliette  entertaining  everyone  with  funny
tales about their mishaps on the golf course that afternoon.
But then, halfway into the meal, something unfortunate
happened—or so I thought, from my American perspective.
Juliette and Hélène got into a big argument over whether
the  town’s  annual  golf  event,  which  occurs  every  spring
practically in Hélène’s backyard, was a good thing or a bad
one.  Hélène  declared  fervently  that  she  was  “totalement
contre”  (completely  against)  the  golf  tournament.  Juliette
interrupted: “Hélène, tu dis ça parce que tu es égoïste. Moi,
je suis pour!” (“You say that because you are selfish. I am all
for it!”). The other guests began to take sides. Voices were
rising and hands were waving.
Now, in my own American culture, this type of debate at
the dinner table is a very bad sign. It would likely result in
someone—perhaps several someones—leaving the room in a
huff,  slamming  the  door,  and  not  returning.  So  I  was
growing  increasingly  uncomfortable  when  Juliette  looked
directly at me and said, “Well, Erin, what do you think?”
Having absolutely no desire to become embroiled in the
debate and offend at least one of my new friends, I found my
answer very quickly: “I have no opinion.” And to my utter
surprise, within a few minutes, the topic changed to who
was going where for the upcoming holidays—with no hard

feelings whatsoever. I watched in bafflement as Juliette and
Hélène went arm in arm to the kitchen to get coffee, their
laughter  ringing  through  the  apartment,  best  friends  as
always.
Of course, a disagreement at the dinner table can happen
in  just  about  any  culture.  But  the  fact  that  Hélène  and
Juliette could engage in such spirited public battle with no
apparent impact on their friendship marks the episode as
distinctly cultural.
Now think for a moment how a scene like this might play
out in a business setting. Imagine the confusion that might
arise among a team of people from varying cultures with
dramatically different attitudes toward open disagreement.
Uncomfortable? Unsettling? To say the least.
CONFRONTATION: LOSS OF FACE OR SPIRITED
DEBATE?
Li Shen, a young Chinese manager, eagerly accepted a job
as  a  marketing  manager  for  French  multinational  L’Oréal
after earning her MBA at a prestigious European institution.
Working  at  L’Oréal’s  Shanghai  office,  Shen’s  excellent
English  and  acceptable  French  gave  her  a  feeling  of
confidence  when  working  with  her  European  colleagues.
Shen recalls, “I hadn’t actually registered the cultural gap
between  myself  and  my  French  colleagues.  After  all,  I
studied  for  several  years  abroad,  and  I  am  much  more
international than most people in China. I like to feel I am
able to easily move from one cultural arena to another.”
After a few months, Shen was invited to come to Paris
and  present  her  ideas  about  how  to  tailor  a  marketing
campaign to the Chinese market. “The company invested a
lot  in  bringing  me  to  the  meeting,  so  I  prepared  my
presentation  tirelessly,”  she  recalls.  “I  spent  all  thirteen
hours of the plane ride from Shanghai rehearsing each slide
so that my points would be polished and convincing.”

There were twelve people in the meeting, and Shen was
the only non-European in the group. Shen’s ideas were clear
and  her  preparation  had  been  meticulous.  But  she  was
taken aback by the challenges thrown at her by her French
colleagues.  “It  started  with  a  question  about  why  I  had
chosen  to  change  a  specific  color  in  a  print  ad.  As  I
explained  my  rationale,  various  members  of  the  group
began to challenge and question my decisions.” Shen felt
attacked  and  humiliated.  “But  mostly  I  felt  upset  with
myself,” she says. “They obviously did not feel that I was the
marketing expert that I claimed to be.” Shen did her best to
keep  her  voice  steady  through  the  presentation,  but  she
admits, “In truth, I was almost in tears.”
When  the  meeting  finally  ended,  Shen  gathered  her
things quickly and made a dash for the door. But before she
could  escape,  she  had  a  surprise.  “Several  of  the
participants, the very ones who had just challenged me in
front of the group, came up to congratulate me,” she says.
“They  commented  on  how  polished  and  interesting  my
presentation  was.  And  at  that  moment,  I  realized  I  was
much more Chinese than I had thought.”
The  concept  that  the  Chinese  call mianzi,  or  “face,”
exists in all societies, but with varying levels of importance.
When you present yourself to others, you offer a persona
that reflects what you publicly claim to be. For example,
when  I  address  a  group  of  international  executives,  I
present myself as a professor specializing in cross-cultural
management,  implicitly  claiming  expertise  and  skill  at
leading  large  groups  of  executives.  So  if  a  participant
publicly suggests that I don’t know what I am talking about
—that my expertise is scanty and my leadership skills are
weak—I “lose face,” experiencing a sort of public shame.
In  Confucian  societies  like  China,  Korea,  and  Japan,
preserving group harmony by saving face for all members of
the  team  is  of  utmost  importance.  Confucius  preached  a
model  of  five  constant relationships  governing  how  the
parent should behave to the child, the older sibling to the

younger, the older friend to the younger friend, the husband
to the wife, and the ruler to the subject. Under this model,
group harmony exists when everyone plays his prescribed
role  and  reinforces  the  roles  of  others.  To  suggest  that
others in the group are not living up to the expectations of
their  role  leads  to  a  loss  of  face  and  a  disturbance  of
societal order.
Raised in this cultural setting, Shen was shocked by the
willingness of her French colleagues to challenge her ideas
in  a  public  forum.  As  she  puts  it,  “In  China,  protecting
another person’s face is more important than stating what
you believe is correct.”
Other  Asian  cultures—especially  those  of  Japan,
Indonesia and Thailand—are even more uncomfortable with
direct  disagreement  than  the  Chinese.  Once,  when
conducting a program with Toshiba Westinghouse, I asked
the  Japanese  participants  why  their  culture  made  such
strong  efforts  to  avoid  confrontation.  I  received  the
following  response  from  Hirotake  Tokunaga  a  few  days
later:
Pick up a Japanese 10,000-yen and you will see the
face  of  Prince  Shotuku,  who  developed  the  first
Japanese  written  constitution.  Prince  Shotuku’s
Seventeen-Article  Constitution  begins,  “Harmony
should  be  valued  and  quarrels  should  be  avoided.”
This sentence is deeply etched in Japanese people’s
minds.  Therefore,  in  Japan  we  strive  to  create
harmony with others, and we believe disagreement is
a  clear  path  to  breaking  harmony.  It  is  considered
deeply  impolite  to  challenge  or  refute  another
person’s  point  of  view  openly  or  publicly.  Even  the
slightest deviation from the other person’s perspective
must be made by the subtlest hint rather than boldly
or argumentatively.
In Western countries, everyone is expected to have
a  different  idea  from  everyone  else.  In  Japan,  it  is

considered more important to avoid saying anything
that  might  offend  or  disturb  the  harmony  of  those
involved in the discussion and to always defer to the
person of highest rank or status.
After returning to China, Shen spoke to several European
colleagues about what had happened at her presentation in
Paris.  “One  of  my  French  teammates  explained  that
students in the French school system are taught to disagree
openly.” As you may recall from our chapter on persuading,
students in the French school system are taught to reason
via thesis, antithesis, and synthesis, first building up one
side  of  the  argument,  then  the  opposite  side  of  the
argument,  before  coming  to  a  conclusion.  Consequently,
French businesspeople intuitively conduct meetings in this
fashion, viewing conflict and dissonance as bringing hidden
contradictions  to  light  and  stimulating  fresh  thinking.  As
Shen’s  colleague  explained  to  her,  “We  make  our  points
passionately.  We  like  to  disagree  openly.  We  like  to  say
things that shock. With confrontation, you reach excellence,
you have more creativity, and you eliminate risk.”
Based on the examples we’ve seen so far, you won’t be
surprised to learn that France falls on the confrontational
side of the Disagreeing scale and that Japan is on the side
that favors avoiding confrontation (Figure 7.1). The United
States  (and  other  Anglo-Saxon  speaking  countries)  fall
somewhere between these two extremes.
To begin to assess where your own culture falls on this
scale, ask yourself the question, “If someone in my culture
disagrees strongly with my idea, does that suggest they are
disapproving  of me  or  just  of  the idea?”  In  more
confrontational  cultures,  it  seems  quite  natural  to  attack
someone’s opinion without attacking that person. In avoid-
confrontation  societies,  these  two  things  are  tightly
interconnected.
FIGURE 7.1. DISAGREEING

CONFRONTATION VERSUS EMOTIONAL
EXPRESSIVENESS
Some who have experience working with people from the
Netherlands,  Denmark,  or  Germany  may  be  surprised  to
find these cultures positioned so close to the French on the
left-hand  side  of  the  Disagreeing  scale.  After  all,  people
from  these  northern  European  cultures  are  generally
considered to be reserved in their expression of emotions.
By the same token, a Mexican or Saudi Arabian might be
surprised to see the right-hand positions of her culture on
the scale. As one Mexican participant in one of my programs
remarked, “When a Mexican is angry, that anger will pour
out of him. We can’t hide how we feel.” Isn’t it logical that a
cultural  readiness  to  express  emotions  openly  would  be
correlated  with  a  similar  willingness  to  express
disagreement?
There’s  no  doubt  that  some  cultures  are  more
emotionally expressive than others. In a study conducted by
researchers Shahid, Krahmer, and Swerts at the University
of Tilberg in the Netherlands, Dutch and Pakistani children

were photographed while playing a card game. The photos
were then shown to a group of seventy-two Dutch adults,
who had to decide whether each pair of children in a given
photo had won or lost the card game.
1
The Dutch judges did a far better job of sorting winners
from  losers  when  looking  at  photos  of  Pakistani  children
than with Dutch children. A glance at some sample photos
shows why (see Figure 7.2). Although all the children are
emotionally expressive, the Pakistani children are far more
demonstrative in their facial expressions and body language
than the Dutch children. Other studies have found similar
differences among other world cultures.
But emotional expressiveness is not the same thing as
comfort  in  expressing  open  disagreement.  In  some
emotionally expressive cultures, such as Spain and France,
people  also  express  disagreement  openly.  But  in  other
emotionally  expressive  cultures,  such  as  Peru  and  the
Philippines, people strongly avoid open disagreement since
there  is  a  good  chance  it  will  lead  to  a  break  in  the
relationship.

To understand how these two cultural patterns interact
with  one  another,  it’s  necessary  to  map  the  Disagreeing
scale against a second scale that measures how emotionally
expressive a culture is. The result is a four-quadrant matrix
(Figure 7.3).
Quadrants  A  and  D  are  pretty  straightforward.  In
Quadrant  A,  emotions  pour  out—and  this  includes  the
emotions  associated  with  disagreement,  which  can  be
expressed  with  little  likelihood  of  relationships  being
harmed.  Israel,  France,  Greece,  Spain,  and  to  a  lesser
degree Italy all follow this easy-to-read pattern. In Quadrant
D, on the other hand, emotions are expressed more subtly—
and disagreements are expressed more softly. Most Asian
cultures fall into this quadrant; so, to a lesser degree, do a
few European cultures, such as Sweden.

FIGURE 7.3.
Quadrants B and C are somewhat more complicated and
require a little more explanation.
Quadrant B, which houses countries like Germany and
the  Netherlands,  includes  cultures  that  are  generally not
emotionally  expressive,  yet  see  debate  and  disagreement
the way the French do—as a critical step on the path to
truth.
When I began consulting for DaimlerChrysler in 2002,
distrust  between  the  two  historic  divisions  of  the
corporation  ran  deep,  with  many  Daimler  executives
proclaiming  publicly  that  they  “would  never  drive  a
Chrysler.” But when I welcomed a group of thirty German

and  American  DaimlerChrysler  executives  into  my
classroom  to  discuss  the  differences  between  their  two
cultures, the tensions were not apparent. On the contrary,
the group worked hard to create an atmosphere of cohesion
and  friendliness,  with  the  Germans  speaking  impeccable
English, several of the Americans practicing their German,
and members of each group humbly cracking jokes at their
own expense. The training session seemed to be going quite
well—until I introduced the Evaluating scale late in the first
morning.
When  I  explained  that  Americans  are  generally  less
direct  with  negative  feedback  than  Germans,  Dirk
Firnhaber,  one  of  the  Germans,  promptly  interjected,  “I
totally  disagree,”  and  went  on  to  cite  several  personal
experiences  as  counterexamples.  A  second  German
colleague  chimed  in  with  his  own  stories  in  support  of
Firnhaber, and when I demurred, the two Germans pushed
back, defending their perspective vigorously.
During  the  lunch  break,  Ben  Campbell,  one  of  the
American  participants,  who  had  been  virtually  silent  all
morning, came up to me. He was visibly frustrated. “I don’t
get it,” he said. “The Germans signed up for this course. No
one is forcing them to attend. And they pay a lot of money to
learn from you. They know your expertise and experience.
Why do they have to constantly disagree with you?”
While  we  were  speaking,  Dirk  approached  us,  having
clearly overheard Ben’s remarks. A bit uncomfortable, Ben
turned to Dirk. “Is it cultural?” he wondered.
“I’ll think about it,” Dirk replied.
Sure enough, after lunch, Dirk was ready to share some
thoughts  about  his  readiness  to  challenge  me  during  the
morning session:
We have this word in German, Sachlichkeit, which is
most  closely  translated  in  English  as  “objectivity.”
With Sachlichkeit,  we  can  separate  someone’s
opinions or idea from the person expressing that idea.

A German debate is a demonstration of Sachlichkeit.
When I say “I totally disagree,” I am debating Erin’s
position,  not  disapproving  of  her.  Since  we  were
children,  we  Germans  have  learned  to  exercise
Sachlichkeit. We believe a good debate brings more
ideas  and  information  than  we  could  ever  discover
without  disagreement.  For  us,  an  excellent  way  to
determine the robustness of a proposal is to challenge
it.
Ben laughed:
Yes!  Sometimes  I  can  imagine  a  German  colleague
walking  into  an  empty  room,  closing  the  door,  and
starting a rational debate with himself. And it’s not
just about business issues. I’ve seen Germans arguing
about  American  politics,  immigration,  all  the  topics
that  we  Americans  have  been  trained  not  to  touch
with a ten-foot pole.
Dirk responded:
Of course we do not debate issues that are irrelevant
or boring! If we are challenging you, it is because we
are  interested.  You  Americans  take  things  so
personally.  If  your  German  colleagues  challenge  a
decision made by the leader of your country, a person
you  support  and  admire,  there’s  no  need  to  get
emotional  or  patriotic.  Just  calmly  provide  your
perspective, in a rational manner, and you will likely
find your workmate is simply interested.
This exchange vividly illustrates why the Germans (along
with  the  Dutch  and  the  Danish)  belong  on  the
confrontational side of the Disagreeing scale—despite the
fact that German culture is less emotionally expressive than
many  others.  If  you  think  of  your  Germanic  European

business  associates  as  stolid,  silent  types,  you  may  be
surprised  when  a  matter  of  controversy  arises.  You  are
likely to find them eager to jump into the fray, since they
regard disagreement not as a matter of personal emotion,
but  rather  as  a  valuable  intellectual  exercise  from  which
truth emerges.
By contrast, the cultures in Quadrant C, such as most
Latin American cultures and some Middle Eastern cultures,
are made up of people who speak with passion, yet are also
sensitive and easily bruised. For people from these cultures,
it is not easy to separate the opinion from the person. If you
attack  my  idea,  I  feel  you  are  attacking  me  also—which
means  I  am  likely  to  want  to  shy  away  from  open
disagreement lest it damage our relationship.
To  make  this  more  complicated,  those  from  Latin
American and (especially) Arabic cultures may appear as if
they are fighting when they speak loudly and move their
bodies  expressively.  But  speaking  with  passion  is  not  the
same thing as disagreeing.
One spring, I led a seminar in Dubai for a multinational
consulting  firm.  After  completing  my  work,  I  decided  to
spend  a  couple  of  days  enjoying  the  warm  weather.  An
Emerati friend from work recommended a boutique hotel in
another  part  of  Dubai,  and  I  made  reservations  for  the
weekend.
Friday at 5:00 p.m., I eagerly accepted a crosstown ride
with one of my seminar participants, an energetic woman in
her  thirties  named  Isar  Selim.  We  soon  found  ourselves
stuck in crazy bottleneck traffic. Not until two hours later
did we emerge onto a quieter street—at which point Selim
began shouting out the window in Arabic to a traditionally
dressed older man, who was crossing the road with a stack
of colorful cloth in his arms. He responded in kind, and as
their voices became louder and more intense, Selim got out
of the car, shouting and gesticulating. I wondered what they
were  arguing  about.  Was  he  angry  because  Selim  was
dressed in Western clothing? Had her car run over some of

his cloth? At one point, I thought the man looked ready to
hit Selim with the bolt of cloth he was carrying.
Finally Selim got back in the car, waved her hand, and
drove  away.  “What  were  you  fighting  about?”  I  asked
timidly.
“Oh, we weren’t fighting,” she said matter-of-factly. “He
was giving me directions to your hotel.”
As  this  story  illustrates,  to  place  a  culture  on  the
Disagreeing scale, don’t ask how emotionally people express
themselves.  Instead,  focus  on  whether  an  open
disagreement  is  likely  to  have  a  negative  impact  on  a
relationship. In Quadrant C cultures, emotional expression
is common, but open disagreements are dangerous. In many
Arabic cultures, people make extreme efforts not to offend
others  by  expressing  direct  disagreement,  as  the
ramifications  for  the  long-term  relationship  could  be
serious.
One final complication in applying the Disagreeing scale
is the position of the Chinese and Korean cultures on the
avoid-confrontation side of the scale. If you have negotiated
with  a  Chinese  team  and  been  forcefully  challenged  by
them,  or  seen  how  confrontational  Koreans  may  be  with
strangers, you may feel puzzled by this positioning.
The explanation lies in the fact that, in both Korea and
China, behavior toward those with in-group status may be
very different from behavior toward those with out-group
status.  Confucius  provided  very  clear  instructions  about
how to behave with people you have relationships with. But
he  provided  almost  no  guidance  on  how  to  behave  with
strangers.  In  China  in  particular,  where  there  is  a  large
population and fierce competition, the relationship toward
those with out-group status can be one of indifference and,
in case of conflict, hostility. Thus, the very same Chinese
person who shows polite and careful respect to his boss,
colleagues, and clients may challenge every point made by a
would-be supplier he doesn’t know at all.

The strategy for succeeding in these cultures thus goes
back to points made in the chapter on trusting. Take all the
time necessary to build up a close trusting relationship. The
time  required  may  be  considerable,  and  a  foreigner  may
never achieve the same level of in-group status as a cultural
insider,  but  a  little  time  invested  in  building  a  personal
connection can go a very long way toward establishing trust
and reducing the level of confrontation you experience.
GETTING GLOBAL TEAMS TO DISAGREE
AGREEABLY
If you are leading a multicultural team, figuring out how to
get all the group members to express their ideas openly and
comfortably may be a challenge. Here are some strategies
that can help.
First, if you’re the boss, consider skipping the meeting.
Depending on the cultures you are dealing with, both your
seniority and age may impact others’ comfort in disagreeing
with  you  openly.  In  many  avoid-confrontation  cultures,  it
may  be  possible  to  disagree  openly  with  a  peer,  but
disagreeing with a boss, superior, or elder is taboo.
When  Danish  multinational  pharmaceutical  company
Novo Nordisk purchased a new operation in Tokyo, Harald
Madsen  found  himself  collaborating  with  a  group  of
Japanese  marketing  managers,  all  younger  than  him  and
junior to him in rank. Madsen scheduled a first trip to Tokyo
in search of feedback from the local managers about which
of  his  initiatives  would  work  well  locally  and  which  they
disagreed with. He hoped to get a good debate going with
them, just as he would in Denmark. But Madsen’s dreams of
a lively sparring match and a creative exchange of ideas
quickly evaporated:
I  began  the  first  meeting  by  telling  my  Japanese
colleagues  that  I  wanted  them  to  feel  comfortable
challenging my ideas so that we could be sure we had

the best solution for their market. I then presented a
few ideas and asked for input. Silence. I pushed the
few with the best English-speaking skills, but it was
impossible. I tried to get the ball rolling. Silence. I
pushed them for input. A few nods of agreement and
platitudes.
I could not figure out how to achieve a productive
discussion if the group would not debate and share
differing viewpoints. All the tools and techniques I had
developed in Denmark were getting me nowhere.
Later in the same trip, over dinner one evening, Madsen
asked Kazuyiki Yoshisaki—a Japanese vice president at his
own level—for advice. “Here in Japan,” Yoshisaki explained,
“even  asking  another’s  point  of  view  can  feel
confrontational  in  our  culture.  When  you  go  around  the
table asking each guy on the team ‘What do you think about
this? What do you think about that?’ that can really take
them off guard. No one wants to be put on the spot in front
of a bunch of people.”
Advance preparation would help Japanese managers feel
more comfortable sharing their opinions openly. Yoshisaki
suggested that Madsen let his team know a few days before
the meeting what input he needed from them, so that they
could check with one another and prepare their comments.
“But the real problem,” Yoshisaki commented, “is your
white hair. In Japanese culture, you almost never see middle
management disagreeing openly with higher management
or younger people disagreeing with older people. It would
be viewed as disrespectful. When you tell them your opinion
and then ask what they think, they are eager to offer their
support. Perhaps you think they will say, ‘Dear elder vice
president, I entirely disagree with you,’ but they will not.”
Yoshisaki suggested that Madsen avoid giving his opinion
first. He also suggested that Madsen ask the team to meet
without him and report back their ideas. “As long as the
boss is present,” Yoshisaki said, “the group will seek to find

out what his opinion is and defer respectfully to him.” This
is  a  technique  that’s  worth  trying  whenever  you  find
yourself  managing  a  team  whose  cultural  background
makes it difficult for them to speak freely in your presence.
A  second  strategy  for  eliciting  opinions  in  an  avoids-
confrontation culture is to depersonalize disagreement by
separating ideas from the people proposing them.
Consider for a moment the brainstorming system that is
so  popular  in  Anglo-Saxon  cultures.  Four  or  five  people
gather  to  record  on  a  flip  chart  every  crazy,  brilliant,  or
downright stupid idea they can muster up. Once the paper
is filled, it’s difficult to remember who came up with which
idea, making it easy to challenge or change an idea without
attacking the person who came up with it.
Harald Madsen took this concept a step further on his
next trip to Japan:
After a presentation, instead of asking for input and
expecting people to raise their hands—which I now
knew  from  experience  would  not  happen—I  asked
everybody to write as many opinions and reactions as
they could on Post-it notes. During a break they put
their  Post-its  anonymously  on  the  main  board  and
then, as a group, we arranged them into sets. Next,
still working all together, we made lists of the positive
and negative elements of each set of ideas, and finally
prioritized  them  by  voting  on  the  most  important.
Each  member  had  only  three  votes,  so  each  of  us
really needed to make a clear choice.
Madsen  found  this  approach  to  be  very  effective  at
producing the positive results of debate and disagreement
without risking relationships.
A  third  strategy  is  to  conduct  meetings before  the
meeting.  I  discovered  the  need  for  this  approach  after
attending a number of cross-cultural meetings that struck
me  as  boring  and  pointless—but  which  participants  from

other  cultures  found  interesting  and valuable.  Curious,  I
began surveying my seminar participants about what they
expected from meetings. I asked:
In order for you to feel a meeting was a great success,
which of the following should happen?
A. In a good meeting, a decision is made.
B. In a good meeting, various viewpoints are
discussed and debated.
C. In a good meeting, a formal stamp is put on a
decision that has been made before the meeting.
The  large  majority  of  Americans  responding  to  this
question chose option A. The French, however, largely chose
option B. And most Chinese and Japanese selected option C.
In many Asian cultures, the default purpose of a meeting is
to  approve  a  decision  that  has  already  been  made  in
informal discussions. Therefore, the most appropriate time
to express your disagreement is before the meeting to an
individual rather than during the meeting in front of the
group.
It’s relatively easy to make this cultural preference work
for  you.  Before  your  next  team  meeting,  try  calling  your
Japanese colleague for a casual offline discussion. You are
much more likely to hear a frank opinion, especially if you
have already built a good relationship.
If you have a large percentage of East Asians on your
global  team,  you  may  consider  adopting  the  informal
premeeting approach and encourage everyone to make one-
on-one prep calls to hear opinions and reach an agreement.
Then you can use your meetings to put a formal stamp on
any consensus decision reached. Explain the process clearly
(that  is,  use  the  “framing”  tactic  described  in  previous
chapters)  so  that  everyone  understands the  process
explicitly. No matter what objective you choose for your own
global  team  meetings  (option  A,  B,  or  C),  you  can  help

everyone  by  being  explicit  about  which  method  you  are
using.
A fourth strategy for encouraging debate among those
who would otherwise shun confrontation is to adjust your
language, avoiding upgraders and employing downgraders
(see pages  65–67  in  Chapter  2)  when  expressing
disagreement.  As  you  recall,  an  upgrader  is  a  word  that
makes  an  opinion  sound  stronger,  such  as  “absolutely,”
“totally,”  or  “completely.”  Such  words  are  popular  in
confrontational  cultures.  By  contrast,  in  confrontation-
avoiding  cultures,  people  are  more  likely  to  use
downgraders  such  as  “sort  of,”  “kind  of,”  “slightly,”  or
“partially.” An extreme example comes from a former Thai
colleague, who would express her disagreement with me by
using  a  quadruple  downgrader:  “Maybe  we  could  think
about this slightly differently . . . perhaps . . . what do you
think?”
When expressing disagreement yourself, it is not difficult
to change your words slightly based on the cultural context
you  are  working  in.  Sean  Green,  an  American  living  and
managing a team in Mexico City, describes his experience:
After  starting  my  assignment  in  Mexico,  I  attended
several meetings during which I would disagree with a
stance  that  one  of  my  peers  or  staff  members  had
taken. And I would voice that disagreement by saying
“I don’t agree with you.” But in Mexican culture this
level of disagreement is not acceptable, and my open
expression of disagreement would effectively end the
debate with no further attempt to change my point of
view.
I soon learned that, if I wanted to encourage team
debate, it was important to use phrases like “I do not
quite  understand  your  point”  and  “Please  explain
more about why you think that.” These expressions
encouraged give-and-take rather than shutting down
the conversation completely.

On the other hand, if you are working with a culture that
is more  confrontational  than  your  own,  be  very  careful
about choosing stronger words than are natural to you to
express  your  disagreement  unless  you  have  a  solid  and
nuanced grasp on exactly where the line is drawn between
acceptable  debate  and  inappropriate  attack.  I  do  not
recommend that you begin an overseas meeting by telling
your French client, “You are totally wrong,” or announcing
to your German supplier, “I am in absolute disagreement
with  your  proposal.”  In  these  cultures,  disagreement  is
expressed  more  directly  than  in  some  others,  but  that
doesn’t mean anything goes. It’s easy to overshoot on the
Disagreeing scale.
This  happened  to  Wei  Lin,  a  Stanford-educated
accounting professor from China who became a colleague of
mine  at  INSEAD.  Lin  was  startled  when  students  made
classroom comments like “I don’t agree with that point,”
which struck him as insolent and inappropriate. Add to this
the fact that Lin was rather small and youthful, so that many
of  his  Dutch,  German,  and  Scandinavian  MBA  students
towered over him, and Lin began to feel that the in-class
disagreements amounted to a public attack on his authority.
Lin sought advice from several of his fellow professors.
“They seemed to feel it was both appropriate and beneficial
to have a debate with the students in the classroom,” Lin
recalls. “So I decided I would be just as confrontational with
them as they were with me.” Unfortunately, Wei Lin didn’t
quite  understand  the  subtle  difference  between  healthy
debate and full-on aggression in a European context. “I was
really shocked when I got the participant evaluations at the
end of the semester. The students described me as hostile
and angry,” he says. “But I was just trying to adapt to their
style.”
Ultimately, Lin managed to find a happy medium:
I found that I could have good results by allowing the
students  to  question  and  disagree  forcefully,  while

constantly reminding myself that this was a sign of
engagement,  not  criticism.  I  tried  to  give  them  a
comfortable space to express all their disagreements,
without confronting them back. This way I remained
Chinese in my own behavior—polite and striving for
group harmony—but not Chinese at all in my reaction
to  their  behavior.  This  seemed  to  work  well.  I
developed  a  great  relationship  with  my  students—
much closer than I used to have with my students in
China,  where  the  professor  is  always  put  up  on  a
pedestal.  Now,  when  I  go  back  to  China  and  the
participants all defer to my opinions silently, I wish
they would disagree with me, at least once in a while.
Particularly  when  working  with  a  culture  that  is  more
confrontational than your own, adapting your style to be like
them  carries  a  big  risk.  Take  a  page  from  Lin’s  strategy
book. Remind yourself that what feels aggressive in your
culture  may  not  feel  so  in  another  culture.  Don’t  take
offense if you can help yourself. But don’t try to mimic a
confrontational  style  that  doesn’t  come  naturally  to  you.
Engage in relaxed debate or discussion without confronting
back.
“LET ME PLAY DEVIL’S ADVOCATE”
Imagine  for  a  moment  that  the  Durands,  whom  you  met
during the dinner party at the beginning of this chapter,
were to move to your hometown. What might happen if they
held a dinner party and invited you, your family, and several
neighborhood friends? To be good hosts, would they need to
tone down the way they disagree?
If the Durands were to move to Minnesota and settle in
near my parent’s home a few blocks east of Lake Calhoun,
using a softer style of disagreement would certainly be one
good strategy. But not the only one. Instead, Hélène Durand
could encourage a lively debate about golf tournaments or

anything  else  she  found  interesting  by  putting  a  frame
around  her  words—explaining  her  style  of  disagreeing
before putting it into practice.
My husband Eric was raised in the same community as
Hélène  and  has  lived  for  many  years  in  both  the  United
Kingdom and the United States—including my hometown.
Although he has learned to work in both the French and
Anglo-Saxon  environments,  he  feels  that  for  any  French
person working with Americans or British, the Disagreeing
scale  is  one  of  the  most  important—and  challenging.  By
comparison with the French, the Americans value harmony
and  equilibrium.  Under  the  umbrella  of  their  written
constitution,  the  Bill  of  Rights,  and  the  Declaration  of
Independence, Americans have developed a highly complex,
multi-ethnic  citizenry  characterized  by  peaceful,  tolerant
coexistence (much of the time). As a result, Americans tend
to perceive dissent as a threat to their unity. “United we
stand,  divided  we  fall,”  is  the  basis  for  many  social
interactions in the United States.
After  inadvertently  creating  some  awkward  scenes  in
American  meetings  with  his  straightforward,  French-style
disagreements, Eric devised a solution:
I  learned  a  very  simple  trick,  perhaps  obvious  to
someone  who  is  British  or  American  but  not  a  bit
obvious to me. Before expressing disagreement, I now
always explain, “Let me play devil’s advocate, so we
can explore both sides.” Most groups seem happy to
do this, as long as I am clear about what I am doing
and why I am doing it.
Sometimes just a few words of explanation framing your
behavior can make all the difference in how your actions are
perceived.  Whether  you  are  from  France  and  living  in
Minnesota,  or  from  Russia  and  living  in  Bangkok,
recognizing how your approach is viewed by those around
you, and taking a moment to describe what you are doing

and why—perhaps with a touch of humor and humility—can
greatly enhance your effectiveness.
There’s a wise Bahamian proverb: “To engage in conflict,
one does not need to bring a knife that cuts, but a needle
that sews.” As we’ve seen in this chapter, what sews nicely
in one culture may cut in another. But with a little effort and
creativity, you can find many ways to encourage and learn
from alternative points of view while safeguarding valuable
relationships.

8
How Late Is Late?
Scheduling and Cross-Cultural
Perceptions of Time
Schedules, deadlines, time pressure . . . we are all painfully
handcuffed to the notion of time. Scheduling is a state of
mind that affects how you organize your day, how you run a
meeting, how far you must plan in advance, and how flexible
those plans are. Yet what is considered appallingly late in
one culture may be acceptably on time in another.
Consider  the  morning  you  wake  up  to  that  harmonica
sound  from  your  iPhone  reminding  you  about  a  meeting
with a supplier on the other side of town at 9:15 a.m. . . .
But your day has an unexpectedly chaotic start. Your toddler
breaks a jar of raspberry jam on the floor and your older son
accidentally steps in it, leading to several stressful minutes
of cleanup. This is followed by a desperate search for the
car keys, which finally turn up in the kitchen cupboard. You
manage to drop the kids off at school just as the bells are
ringing  and  the  doors  are  closing.  At  that  moment,  your
iPhone chimes 9:00 a.m., which means you’ll be about six or

seven minutes late for the important meeting—provided the
crosstown traffic is no worse than usual.
What to do?
You could of course call the supplier to apologize and
explain that you will be arriving exactly at 9:21. Or possibly
9:22.
Or you consider that six or seven minutes late is basically
on time. You decide not to call and simply pull your car out
into traffic.
And  then  perhaps  you  just  don’t  give  the  time  any
thought at all. Whether you arrive at 9:21 or 9:22 or even
9:45, you will still be within a range of what is considered
acceptably on time, and neither you nor the supplier will
think much of it.
If  you  live  in  a  linear-time  culture  like  Germany,
Scandinavia,  the  United  States,  or  the  United  Kingdom,
you’ll probably make the call. If you don’t, you risk annoying
your supplier as the seconds tick on and you still haven’t
shown up.
On the other hand, if you live in France or northern Italy,
chances are you won’t feel the need to make the call, since
being  six  or  seven  minutes  late  is  within  the  realm  of
“basically on time.” (If you were running twelve or fifteen
minutes late, however, that would be a different story.)
And if you are from a flexible-time culture such as the
Middle East, Africa, India, or South America, time may have
an altogether different level of elasticity in your mind. In
these societies, as you fight traffic and react to the chaos
that  life  inevitably  throws  your  way,  it  is  expected  that
delays will happen. In this context, 9:15 differs very little
from 9:45, and everybody accepts that.
When people describe those from another culture using
words  like inflexible,  chaotic,  late,  rigid,  disorganized,
inadaptable, it’s quite likely the scheduling dimension is the
issue.  And  understanding  the  subtle,  often  unexpressed
assumptions  about  time  that  control  behaviors  and
expectations in various cultures can be quite challenging.

When I first moved to France, I was warned by other
Americans  that  the  French  were  always  late.  And  this
turned out to be partially true, though the impact on my
daily work was small. For example, shortly after arriving in
Paris,  I  arranged  to  visit  a  human  resources  manager
specializing in expatriate assignments, in one of the glass
towers of La Défense (the Paris corporate business district).
Arriving  carefully  at  9:55  a.m.  for  my  10:00  a.m.
appointment, I practiced my rusty French nervously in my
head.  The  woman  I  was  scheduled  to  meet,  Sandrine
Guegan, was a longtime client of the firm and knew my boss
well. He had assured me that Ms. Guegan would welcome
me warmly.
The  receptionist  called  Madame  Guegan  at  precisely
10:00 a.m. and, after a second with her on the phone, said
to  me  politely,  “Patientez  s’il  vous  plaît”  (wait  patiently
please). So I perched myself carefully on the big leather
couch and pretended I was looking at a newspaper while I
waited patiently for five minutes. But at 10:07 I was not
feeling very patient. Had I gotten the time of the meeting
wrong?  Was  there  some  unavoidable  emergency?  And  at
10:10  .  .  .  was  the  meeting  going  to  take  place  at  all?
Madame Guegan stepped out of the elevator at 10:11, and,
without a word of apology for her tardiness, she welcomed
me warmly. After many years of working in both the United
States and France, I can now confirm that in most cases you
get about ten more minutes’ leeway (to run late, start late,
end late, take a tangent) in France than you would in the
United States. And if you know this, in most circumstances
it is really no big deal to adapt.
The  first  time  I really  understood  the  impact  of  the
scheduling dimension came when I was working in South
America. Earlier in the week, I had given a keynote speech
in  Denver,  Colorado,  to  a  group  of  approximately  five
hundred, mostly American, managers. The afternoon before
the event, Danielle, the conference organizer, had shown me
a stack of cards she would be holding in her lap during my

forty-minute talk. “I’ll hold up a sign every ten minutes,” she
explained,  showing  me  cards  that  read  “thirty  minutes,”
“twenty  minutes,”  and  “ten  minutes”  in  bold  black
characters. The sequence concluded with cards that read
“five minutes,” “two minutes,” and “zero minutes.” It was
evident that the big black zero on the final card meant in no
uncertain terms that my time was up, and, when I saw it, I
was to exit the stage.
I understood Danielle perfectly. She is a typical member
of my (American) tribe, and I was very comfortable with the
idea of monitoring each minute carefully. My speech went
beautifully,  and  my  linear-time  audience  was  aptly
appreciative.
A  few  days  later  I  was  dining  with  Flavio  Ranato,  a
charming older Brazilian man, in a glass-walled restaurant
overlooking  the  lights  of  Brazil’s  fifth-largest  city,  Belo
Horizonte. We were planning the presentation I would give
the next day to a large group of South Americans. “This
topic is very important to our organization,” Ranato told me.
“The participants will love it. Please feel free to take more
time than is scheduled if you like. The group will benefit.”
I  didn’t  quite  understand,  as  I  had  already  tested  my
presentation with the IT support person, and the agenda for
the  conference  was  already  printed  and  posted  on  the
conference door. “I have forty-five minutes on the agenda.
How  much  time  were  you  thinking?  Could  I  take  sixty
minutes?” I wondered out loud.
With a gentle shrug of his shoulders, Ranato responded,
“Of course, take the time you need.”
Uncertain about his meaning I confirmed, “Great, I will
take  sixty  minutes,”  and  Ranato  nodded  in  agreement.  I
went back to my hotel room and adapted my presentation to
a sixty-minute time slot.
The next day at the conference, I noticed immediately
that  the  agenda  on  the  door  still  said  I  had  forty-five
minutes. A bit unnerved, I sought out Ranato in the crowd.
“I just want to make sure I understood correctly,” I said.

“Did you want me to take forty-five or sixty minutes for my
presentation this morning?”
Ranato laughed a little, as if my behavior was unusual.
“Do not worry, Erin,” he tried to reassure me. “They will
love it. Please take whatever time you need.”
“I will take sixty minutes,” I articulated again.
When  my  presentation  began  (after  a  number  of
unanticipated delays), the group responded as Ranato had
predicted.  They  were  boisterously  appreciative,  waving
their arms to ask questions and provide examples during the
question period at the end of my talk. Carefully watching
the large clock at the back of the room, I ended my session
after  sixty-five  minutes.  I  was  a  few  minutes  late  as  one
question ran longer than I had expected.
Ranato approached me. “It was great, just as I hoped.
But you ended so early!”
Early? I was really confused. “I thought I was supposed
to take sixty minutes, and I took sixty-five,” I ventured.
“You could have certainly gone longer! They were loving
it!” Ranato insisted.
Later  that  evening,  Ranato  and  I  had  an  enlightening
discussion about our mutual incomprehension.
“I didn’t want to use any extra moment of your group’s
time without getting explicit permission,” I explained. “You
gave me sixty minutes. To me, it would be disrespectful to
the group if I took more time than prescheduled without
getting your permission.”
“But I don’t get it,” Ranato responded. “In this situation,
we are the customer. We are paying you to be here with us.
If you see that we have more questions and would like to
continue  the discussion,  isn’t  it  simply  good  customer
service to extend the presentation in order to answer our
questions and meet our needs?”
I was confused. “But if you have not explicitly told me
that I can take another fifteen minutes, how do I know that
is what you want?”

Ranato looked at me curiously, as it started to dawn on
him how much of a foreigner I was. “They were so obviously
interested and engaged. Couldn’t you tell?”
I was beginning to realize how enormous the impact of
differing  attitudes  toward  time  can  be.  The  assumptions
Ranato  and  I  made  about  scheduling  caused  us  to  have
contrasting  definitions  of  “good  customer  service.”  The
story underscores the importance of understanding how the
people you work with think about time—and adjusting your
expectations accordingly.
STUDYING CULTURE TILL THE COWS COME
HOME
Anthropologist  Edward  T.  Hall  was  one  of  the  first
researchers to explore differences in societal approaches to
time. In The Dance of Life: The Other Dimension of Time,
Hall  referred  to monochronic  (M-time)  cultures  and
polychronic (P-time) cultures. M-time cultures view time as
tangible and concrete: “We speak of time as being saved,
spent, wasted, lost, made up, crawling, killing and running
out.  These  metaphors  must  be  taken  seriously.  M-time
scheduling is used as a classification system that orders life.
These rules apply to everything except death.”
1
By contrast, P-time cultures take a flexible approach to
time, involvement of people, and completion of transactions:
“Appointments  are  not  taken  seriously  and,  as  a
consequence, are frequently broken as it is more likely to be
considered a point rather than a ribbon in the road. . . . An
Arab will say ‘I will see you before one hour’ or ‘I will see
you after two days.’” In other words, a person who lives in
P-time will suggest a general approximate meeting slot in
the coming future without nailing down the exact moment
that meeting will take place.
When I worked as a Peace Corps volunteer in Botswana
(a P-time culture), I used to feel puzzled that a local teacher
at my school would tell me “I am coming now,” but twenty

minutes later I would still be waiting with no sign of that
person’s  arrival.  Later,  I  learned  that  if  someone  was
actually coming right away, they would say “I am coming
now, now.” That second “now” made all the difference.
In the wake of Hall’s work, psychologist Robert Levine
began meticulously observing and analyzing various cultural
approaches  to  clocks.
2
  He  noted  that  some  cultures
measure time in five-minute intervals, while other cultures
barely use clocks and instead schedule their day on what
Levine calls “event time”: before lunch, after sunrise, or in
the  case  of  the  locals  in  Burundi,  “when  the  cows  come
home.”
Of  course,  a  business  manager  in  any  country  in  the
world is more likely to wear a wristwatch than to tell time
by the sunset or by passing cows. But the way individuals
experience the time shown by the hands on the watch still
differs dramatically from one society to the next.
RELATIONSHIPS: A KEY TO UNDERSTANDING
THE SCHEDULING SCALE
As  with  the  other  cultural  scales  we’ve  examined  in  this
book,  the  Scheduling  scale  is  profoundly  affected  by  a
number of historic factors that shape the ways people live,
work, think, and interact with one another. Positions on the
Scheduling  scale  are  partially affected  by  how  fixed  and
reliable, versus dynamic and unpredictable, daily life is in a
particular country.
If  you  live  in  Germany,  you  probably  find  that  things
pretty much go according to plan. Trains are reliable; traffic
is manageable; systems are dependable; government rules
are clear and enforced more or less consistently. You can
probably schedule your entire year on the assumption that
your environment is not likely to interfere greatly with your
plans.
There’s  a  clear  link  between  this  cultural  pattern  and
Germany’s place in history as one of the first countries in

the world to become heavily industrialized. Imagine being a
factory worker in the German automotive industry. If you
arrive at work four minutes late, the machine for which you
are  responsible  gets  started  late,  which  exacts  a  real,
measurable  financial  cost.  To  this  day,  the  perception  of
time in Germany is partially rooted in the early impact of
the industrial revolution, where factory work required the
labor  force  to  be  on  hand  and  in  place  at  a  precisely
appointed moment.
In other societies—particularly in the developing world—
life centers around the fact of constant change. As political
systems shift and financial systems alter, as traffic surges
and  wanes,  as  monsoons  or  water  shortages  raise
unforeseeable  challenges,  the  successful  managers  are
those  who  have  developed  the  ability  to  ride  out  the
changes  with  ease  and  flexibility.  Scheduling  things  in
advance is fine—but only if the time horizon is forty-eight
hours or less.
For  example,  if  you  are  a  farmer  in  the  Nigerian
countryside, most of the farmwork is done by people, and
you likely have few machines. In this environment, it doesn’t
matter much if you start work at 7:00 or 7:12 or even 7:32.
What matters is that your work structure is flexible enough
to adapt with changes in the natural environment, and that
you  have  invested  in  the  critical  relationships needed  to
keep  your  workers  loyal  in  times  of  drought  or  flooding,
erosion  or  insect  infestation.  In  this  environment,
productivity and profit are directly linked to the flexibility
and the relationships of the person in charge.
Indeed, the importance of relationships seems to be a
key to understanding the Scheduling scale. It’s only logical
that if relationships are a priority, you will put them before
the clock. Thus it’s natural that cultures that put a premium
on relationship building tend, with a few exceptions, to fall
on the flexible-time side of the Scheduling scale (see Figure
8.1).

FIGURE 8.1. SCHEDULING
As usual, all positions on the scale should be considered
in relative terms. Germans may complain bitterly about the
British lack of punctuality, and Indians often feel the French
are rigid with their scheduling. However, Germanic, Anglo-
Saxon, and Northern European countries generally fall on
the linear-time side of the scale. Latin cultures (both Latin
European and Latin American) tend to fall on the flexible-
time side, with Middle Eastern and many African cultures
on the far right. Asian cultures are scattered on this scale.
Japan  is  linear-time,  but  China  and  (especially)  India
practice flexible-time.
When you work with people from varying cultures, you
find  that  the  scheduling  dimension  impacts  a  remarkable
number of aspects of daily life, from how meetings are run
to how people wait in line.

A LINE IS NOT A LINE: QUEUING IN
STOCKHOLM VERSUS SWARMING IN INDORE
It was a December morning in Stockholm—pitch-dark and
very cold. I was going to meet with a client at the Swedish
company Seco Tools, whose office was close to the route of
bus  #42.  As  I  waited,  I  barely  noticed  the  other  people
gathered  at  the  bus  stop,  since  I  was  mostly  focused  on
moving my legs briskly in a vain attempt to stay warm. So
when the bus pulled up, I was eager to get on. The woman
closest to the door got on first, and then I stepped forward,
happy to follow her. However, although I had been oblivious
to the loose queue my fellow passengers had formed, I could
scarcely miss the angry coughs they directed my way when I
boarded before them.
Cutting in line—even inadvertently—is a cultural crime in
Sweden. This rule is a natural outgrowth of the linear-time
belief in managing items one at a time, in proper order—
including people who are waiting in line.
By  contrast,  before  traveling  to  India  several  students
had explained to me the “evergreen tree culture” of waiting
one’s  turn.  When  it  is  necessary  for  a  line  to  form,  for
example  when  waiting  to  purchase  a  ticket,  some  eager
individuals will form the initial trunk of a tree. Then, when
the trunk begins to look too long to some, a few individuals
will create their own lines by standing next to, say, the fifth
person  in  the  trunk  and  implicitly  suggesting  that  others
line up behind them. This process continues until you have a
human evergreen tree, a single-file trunk of people waiting
with  restless  branches  sprouting  and  growing  on  both
sides.
3
This, at least, was the preparation I had received before
my trip. My own experience suggests that Indian queues
can be even more flexible than the “evergreen tree theory”
implies.
I had just spent two days in Indore, the most populous
city in central India, working with a group of undergraduate

students  at  the  Indian  Institute  of  Planning  and
Management. When I arrived at the check-in counter for my
flight from Indore Airport, I carefully positioned myself at
the front of the line in order to avoid any branch-sprouting.
Soon,  however,  dozens  of  other  passengers  began  to
arrive,  swarming  behind  me.  Within  minutes,  I  was
surrounded  by  people  with  questions,  lost  tickets,  and
oversized bags. One woman put her ticket on the counter
next to mine, explaining some urgent problem related to the
name on the ticket. An older gentleman caught the check-in
woman’s  attention  by  describing  in  Hindi  some  urgent
matter  to  do  with  his  bag.  The  kind  woman  behind  the
counter began tending to several customers at once, making
phone calls, printing new tickets, and answering questions
from people pushing forward on my left and my right.
Somewhat  to  my  surprise,  all  of  the  customers’  needs
were met and we departed more or less on schedule.
That evening in New Delhi, I regaled my Indian host with
the  difference  between  waiting  in  line  in  Indore  versus
Stockholm. “You are right,” he laughed.
We are more flexible in India. Because we grew up in
a  society  where  currency  wasn’t  always  stable  and
governments could change regulations on a whim, we
learned to value flexibility over linear planning. But
Europeans and Americans are more rigid. They expect
us to work by carefully closing one box before opening
the next. Like your idea that only one person in the
queue  should  be  treated  at  a  time,  with  no
interruptions.
I was learning that flexible-time cultures, like India, tend
to emphasize leaving many boxes open and working on all of
them  simultaneously.  One  thing  at  a  time?  That  may  be
common sense in Stockholm, but not in Indore.

A MEETING IS LIKE WAITING IN A LINE
The differences between lines in Sweden and lines in India
reflect broader differences between linear-time cultures and
flexible-time cultures.
Consider, for example, a simple business meeting. In the
United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  Scandinavia,  or
Germany, you’re likely to find that all parties attending the
meeting share the assumption that a meeting should look
like a line. Accordingly, an agenda is set out ahead of time
explaining,  in  the  form  of  a  list,  exactly  what  time  the
meeting will start and what subjects will be discussed in
what  order.  Sometimes  an  actual  number  of  minutes  are
allotted  to  each  topic  so  that  the  meeting  can  end  at  a
preset time.
If  an  attendee  should  try  to  “hijack”  the  meeting  by
bringing up some topic not found on the agenda, one linear-
time participant is likely to interrupt, saying, “This is not on
the  agenda,  so  let’s  take  this  offline  and  discuss  it  at  a
break,” or “Let’s park this until another time,” or “Can we
put  this  on  the  agenda  for  next  week?”  or  perhaps  an
exasperated “People! A little discipline, please!”
What’s  more,  in  a  linear-time  culture,  people  in  a
meeting are supposed to behave as if in a Swedish line. You
should not be talking to your neighbor at the same time
someone else is talking. You should not be taking cell phone
calls on the sidelines. The group will take scheduled “bio
breaks,” so please don’t leave and re-enter the room. For
those on linear time, any behavior that distracts from the
predefined task at hand is just plain rude.
But a meeting in a flexible-time culture like those found
in South America, parts of Europe, Africa, and the Middle
East  is  more  like  an  evergreen  tree.  An  agenda  with  a
meeting start time and a topic will probably be circulated
before the meeting. This will serve as the trunk of the tree.
But there’s no expectation that the meeting will progress in
a linear manner. What seemed like a priority last week when
the agenda was crafted is not necessarily the priority right

now—so discussion may branch off in a new direction. Other
branches may sprout as some members have urgent phone
calls that take them in and out of the meeting. Or subgroups
may form within the room to discuss timely subjects linked
in some way to the main meeting trunk.
In  flexible-time  cultures,  it  seems  clear  that  the  most
productive meetings grow in unpredictable ways, and the
effective  manager  is  flexible  and  professional  enough  to
capitalize on priorities and changing needs as they arise.
Interruptions,  agenda  changes,  and  frequent  shifts  in
direction are seen as natural and necessary.
WAITING FOR A SIGN FROM THE MOON: THE
STYLE-SWITCHING APPROACH TO
SCHEDULING CHALLENGES
As you might expect, the scheduling dimension also impacts
the way we plan our time and how fixed or flexible those
plans are felt to be.
When Dr. Ahmed Acidah, an articulate and experienced
human resources executive from a Nigerian bank, applied to
attend  our  one-week  Global  Virtual  Teams  program  at
INSEAD, I hesitated. Normally participants attending this
program have teams dispersed across many countries. But
Acidah had just two nationalities on his team—Nigerian and
German. However, we did accept Acidah into the program,
and  it  turned  out  he  had  enough  experience  with  cross-
cultural misunderstandings between these two nationalities
to fill a year’s worth of discussion.
During  the  program,  Acidah  explained  one  of  the
challenges he faced:
The  Germans  plan  everything  not  just  weeks,  but
months in advance. Last week, three months before a
conference I will attend in Germany, I received an e-
mail asking me to choose, from three options, what I

want to have for dinner at the conference opener on
April 6. Now let me ask you, how can I be expected to
know today, a day in January, what I am going to want
to  eat  on  April  6?  But  this  is  no  joke.  If  you  don’t
check the box, schedule your meal choice, and return
it by the stated date, someone will start hunting you
by e-mail.
Acidah’s  Nigerian  staff  was  in  a  full-fledged  revolt
against this approach. The Germans, their calendars filled
with meetings scheduled months earlier, wanted to get the
team meetings for the next six months on the calendar now;
that way they felt assured the meetings would take place
and  projects  would  move  forward  as  expected.  The
Nigerians were caught between not wanting to create a fuss
over  a  mere  calendar  invitation,  and  knowing  from
experience that trouble would ensue if they committed now
and were unable to follow through later. Acidah continued:
What these Germans do not understand is that things
are  always  changing  in  Nigeria.  I  can’t  possibly
schedule a meeting three months from today because
it is impossible to know what will have changed. I am
from the Muslim part of Nigeria, and where I live you
don’t even know when the holiday is going to start
until the Supreme Leader looks at the moon and says
that the holiday starts now. If I don’t know which days
will be a holiday, how can I possibly know at which
moment two months and seven days from now I will
be available to talk on the phone?
My German colleagues don’t get it. They want me
to tell them weeks in advance if I will be available on
Tuesday, June 24—and if I am not available when that
day rolls around, they take offense.
This  small  example  illustrates  the  difficulties  of
developing realistic schedules when working internationally.

One  culture  tells  time  by  when  the  cows  come  home.
Another schedules meetings based on the Supreme Leader’s
moon analysis. A speaker from Minnesota stops speaking
the moment the zero card pops up, leaving her Brazilian
host baffled about her refusal to satisfy an audience hungry
for additional insights.
A  first  strategy  for  dealing  effectively  with  the
Scheduling scale is to increase your own ability to work in
different  ways.  Style  switching  is  an  essential  skill  for
today’s global manager.
Mario Mota, a Brazilian from Rio de Janeiro working for
the  World  Bank,  tells  how  he  learned  to  switch  styles  in
regard to a simple but vexing scheduling problem:
As a child, I learned from my mother that when invited
to dinner, it is inappropriate to arrive at the time the
host has asked you to come. Doing so will ultimately
end  with  the  hosts  running frantically  around  the
house  to  put  things  in  order  and  will  cause
unnecessary  stress  for  everyone.  The  best  time  to
arrive is fifteen minutes after the stated time—or later
—so the hosts will be ready and relaxed, and everyone
will enjoy the evening.
I  will  never  forget  the  first  time,  as  a  young
manager, I was invited to my American boss’s house
for dinner. My boss and his wife invited me as well as
the four other members of my team for 6:00 p.m. and I
carefully  arrived  at  6:35.  “What  happened?”  the
worried hosts asked as they opened the door. “Did you
get lost? Or stuck in traffic?” Everyone was waiting
for  me  and  the  table  was  already  set.  What  a
humiliation!
Fortunately,  the  Scheduling  scale  is  one  of  the  easier
scales to adapt to. It only took one awkward dinner for Mota
to learn the proper time to arrive when invited to dinner in
an American household. The next time, he recalls, “I arrived

five  minutes  before  the  stated  start  time,  parked  my  car
around the corner and watched the clock carefully. At 5.59
p.m., I left the car and at six o’clock I rang the doorbell. My
hosts were expecting me.”
Sometimes style switching is this easy: Learn what works
best in that culture and do things the way they do them.
However, understanding the cultural nuances and gauging
them precisely can sometimes be challenging. Mota offers
another story:
Although  I  worked  hard  during  my  career  on
becoming more culturally agile, I have learned that, if
you try adapting your style, three times out of five you
will miss the mark on the first try.
I was running a meeting in Germany a few weeks
ago. I know the Germans are even more focused on
punctuality  than  the  Americans,  but  I  didn’t  really
know how punctual that meant. My presentation was
supposed to end at 2:00 p.m. I was watching the clock
carefully. And at 2:02 I was ready to wrap up, when
one of the German participants asked a question that
required a detailed answer. And I said something very
un-Brazilian.  I  said,  “This  is  a  very  interesting
question, but I’m afraid time is up.” I found out later
from the organizers that the Germans were put off by
my rigid approach. They felt I was inflexible.
My Brazilian way would have been to answer the
question in front of everyone, stretching the meeting
longer. Since I knew that my natural strategy wasn’t
the best one for this context, I defaulted to something
that came off as abrupt and unprofessional.
Later, I gave it some thought, and I realized all the
simple and obvious ways I could have better handled
the situation. I could have done like the Americans do
and asked to take the question “offline,” meaning we
will  end  the  official  part  of  the  meeting  now  and
discuss the question one-on-one afterward. Or I could

have  said  I’d  be  happy  to  answer  the  question  for
anyone who wanted to stay longer.
Style switching sounds very simple, but it takes a lot of
trial and error to understand the subtleties and to get them
right.  You  have  to  try,  miss  the  mark,  try  again,  and
gradually find you are becoming more and more competent.
Complicating style switching is the fact that each culture
has its own peculiarities and apparent contradictions. Cam
Johnson was raised in Michigan and lived in Tokyo for two
years before moving to Beijing. In Japan, he became aware
of  the  enormous  importance  placed  on  punctuality—even
when it comes to events where punctuality is ignored in the
United States. Cam recalls, “I took my teenage son to an
Eminem rap concert in Chiba at the Makuhari Messe. The
concert  was  scheduled  to  start  at  8:00  p.m.  In  other
countries, a rap concert starts thirty, sixty, ninety minutes
late.  Not in  Tokyo.  We  showed  up  eleven  minutes  late
because of traffic, and my son missed eleven minutes of the
show.”
When  Cam  moved  his  family  to  Beijing,  he  initially
believed that the Chinese would take a similar approach to
time. Little by little, however, the differences between the
Chinese and Japanese scheduling systems became clear to
him:
In Chinese culture, punctuality is a virtue, and if you
arrive  late  for  a  meeting  you  should  definitely
apologize  for  your  tardiness.  But  any  similarity  in
approach to time between the Chinese and Japanese
stops  there.  The  Japanese  are  highly  organized
planners.  They  are  definitely  more  organized  than
they  are  flexible.  In  China,  everything  happens
immediately,  without  preplanning.  The  Chinese  are
the kings of flexibility. This is a culture where people
don’t think about tomorrow or next week; they think
about right now.

For example, I had to call an electrician because
my TV was broken. Within five minutes of my hanging
up the phone, he was knocking at my door. When I had
a clogged drain, I called the plumber and he showed
up a few minutes later. Now I know that, when there
is a problem with something, I’d better be ready for
someone to come in and fix it as soon as I pick up the
phone.
Reactivity  is  key  here,  but  that  also  means  that
plans  that  are  made  in  advance  are  considered
flexible. The Chinese will often pop in to see you with
no appointment. This used to make me angry. I felt
they didn’t respect my time. Can’t they send a simple
e-mail in advance so I can be ready for them when
they arrive? Do they think I don’t have anything else
to do? That my time is disposable?
But now that I’ve become a bit Chinese myself, I’ve
learned  I  can  do  this,  too.  If  I’m  traveling  in
Guangzhou and I have thirty minutes to spare, I just
make  a  quick  call  from  a  taxi  and  visit  someone
working in the area. I’ve come to see this system as
highly flexible and efficient.
Something similar applies to meetings. In China, if
you send out an advance agenda, you’ll arrive to find
out either that no one has read the agenda or that the
meeting has been canceled. So now I call a day before
to make sure the meeting is still on. And when we
meet,  I  try  to  remain  flexible  and  let  things  get
covered  in  whatever  order  they  may  happen  rather
than trying to stick with a prearranged schedule.
The most interesting thing about hearing how Johnson
learned  to  work  with  the  Chinese  was  how  he  came  to
appreciate the strengths of the Chinese approach:
Now I look at the way my Chinese colleagues work
and I just marvel at it. They are amazing at ad hoc

logistics.  For  example,  I’ve  attended  dozens  of
workshops in China, and not one has gone according
to  plan.  Things  change  the  night  before:  speakers,
topics, even venues. But it all ends up working out.
Once you understand that the Chinese are extremely
flexible, everything works fine if you just do the same.
THE FRAMING STRATEGY FOR CROSS-
CULTURAL LEADERS
Style switching is a powerful approach for those who are
visiting another culture—indeed, an essential one. But what
if  you  are  not the  visitor?  What  if  you  are  the  leader  in
charge of a multicultural team with members who practice a
variety of scheduling styles? In this situation, flexibility and
open-mindedness are not enough.
It’s nine o’clock on Monday morning, and my course is
supposed to start. However, of the thirty-two Saudi Arabian
managers who are visiting INSEAD and are scheduled to
spend the day with me, only one is in the classroom—and
since he is talking on the phone, I can’t ask him where the
rest are.
Fifteen minutes later, the group starts to trickle in, and
at  about  9:35  I  get  started.  It  all  works  fine  for  me.
Understanding the Saudi flexible-time system, I let both my
lectures and our breaks stretch a little longer, using any
extra  time  to  build  relationships  and  get  to  know  one
another better.
The  following  week,  I  happened  to  have  another
classroom day scheduled with a group of Saudis. This time,
the program director had taken steps to adjust the students’
scheduling expectations. During the program introduction,
he  told  them,  “During  our  week  together,  we  should  all
imagine we are in Switzerland. We will start on time, to the
minute, and end on time, to the minute. And anyone who
forgets this team culture and comes late to class will have to

contribute  five  euros  to  the  fund  for  our  end-of-the-week
champagne party!”
The  system  worked.  This  group  of  thirty-two  Saudi
Arabian  managers  were  the  most  punctual  group  I  have
ever  worked  with.  At  nine  o’clock  sharp,  every  single
student  was  in  his  seat.  The  only  catch  was  that  I  was
subject to the same rules. If I arrived late after a break or
allowed my lecture to run long, I had to pay, too. That day
cost me fifteen euros—but I will do better next time.
People can be remarkably adaptable when it comes to
the Scheduling scale if the team leader establishes a clear
and explicit team culture.
Cam Johnson, the American manager who moved from
Tokyo to Beijing, explained in an interview the method he
used  when  bringing  Germans,  Brazilians,  Americans,  and
Indians together on one team. He recalled:
When the team had its first face-to-face meeting, we
invested half a day working in small break-out groups
to  create  a  team  charter.  We  spent  a  full  hour
discussing what we wanted our conference calls and
meetings to be like and what approach to timing we
would follow. I asked them to decide as a group how
they  wanted  to  work  together,  and  what  level  of
flexibility  versus  structure  they  expected  from  one
another  during  the  meetings.  We  didn’t  talk  at  all
about  cultural  differences  in  that  meeting.  We  just
talked  about  how  we,  this  specific  team,  wanted  to
collaborate.
Having a clear discussion about scheduling systems up
front can ease frustration that may otherwise pop up down
the line. Having framed an agreement, the group can follow
its own team culture instead of allowing members to follow
the methods most natural in their home countries. After the
team style has been created, the team leader will need to
reinforce what the group has agreed and set aside time to

revisit  the  agreement  about  twice  a  year,  making  any
adaptations necessary.
“YOUR WAY IS SO INEFFICIENT!”
Perhaps  the  most  interesting  thing  about  the  Scheduling
scale is that those from each side of the scale see those
from the other side as inefficient and imagine they must
lead lives that are terribly difficult and stressful.
When giving a talk about cultural differences during the
trip to Indore, India, mentioned earlier, I had to constantly
remind myself, “Flexibility is the key to success.” Although
I’d started my talk thirty-five minutes after the scheduled
time, many participants arrived an hour late—or two—and
others came and went at unforeseen moments, hearing my
presentation in fits and starts. During this session, I told the
story  about  my  back-to-back  presentations—the  one  in
Denver  orchestrated  by  Danielle  with  her  time-tracking
cards, and the one in Brazil that Ranato felt had been cut
short inappropriately after just sixty-five minutes. I used the
story, of course, to dramatize the extreme differences that
cultures can exhibit when it comes to the Scheduling scale.
Afterward,  a  woman  in  her  sixties,  an  accomplished
psychologist garbed in a beautiful sari, came up to offer a
comment. She’d been startled by my experience in Denver.
“This type of rigidity that you have described to us about
your American culture . . . it sounds extremely inefficient,”
she  remarked.  “All  that  time  you  spent  rehearsing  your
presentation, getting the minutes down just right. It must be
incredibly  stressful  and  time-consuming  to  give  a
presentation in this type of environment. You must all get
heart attacks! Yet the business culture of the U.S. has set an
example for the rest of us for decades. I find it puzzling.”
A response all but leapt to my lips. “No, no, no,” I wanted
to say (but restrained myself), “the system in my culture is
an example of efficiency and relaxation. We set the plan, we
prepare,  we  follow  the  plan.  It  is  here,  during  this  very

session right now, when we are supposed to start at 9:00
a.m. but people arrive and leave (and come back again) at
random. . . . this is what is inefficient and stressful. This is
inefficient, because you are investing your time in coming to
the session, but you are not getting what you are supposed
to out of it, because you don’t experience it from beginning
to end . . . in order . . . one step at a (linear) time.”
I opened my mouth to try to explain that, but I thought
better of it. Instead, I invited this woman to go and stand
with me in the evergreen-shaped line that was sprouting up
at the coffee machine.

Epilogue
Putting the Culture Map to Work
When Ethan, my older son, was a baby, I invited a Danish
colleague visiting Paris from Copenhagen over for dinner. It
was a very cold January night, and Søren and I were talking
in the kitchen while my husband dressed Ethan in the other
room. After listening to my new-mother woes, Søren, who
has three children, looked out onto our balcony and asked,
“Do you give Ethan his naps outside or inside?”
I didn’t understand the question. “Outside or inside of
what?”  I  asked.  It  was  so  cold  outside  that  I  had  put
insulation  around  the  door  to  keep  the  biting  wind  from
whistling through the cracks. Was Søren suggesting I put
our child out in the icy winter air for a two-hour nap? I
wondered  whether  there  was  some  fundamental  rule  of
mothering that everyone had forgotten to tell me.
I was surprised when Søren explained that, in Denmark,
it is quite common for parents to put their babies out in the
winter afternoon for a nap. “We wrap them up and bring
them in if it gets to be below minus ten degrees. It’s good
for them. They sleep better and they’re less likely to get
sick.”  Søren’s  minus  ten  was  Celsius, the  equivalent  of
fourteen degrees Fahrenheit. Even folks from my hometown
in Minnesota would say “Brrr!”
A few years later, I got a call from a Danish woman who
would be attending my weeklong course at INSEAD. “You
asked  us  to  prepare  three  things  that  are  strange  or

surprising  about  our  culture  to  share  with  the  group  on
Monday evening,” she said. “But I’ve thought a lot about it,
and  I  can’t  think  of  anything  unusual  or  strange  about
where I come from.”
“Why don’t you talk about putting your babies outside to
nap on cold winter afternoons?” I suggested
“Would someone think that is strange?” she asked me,
sounding  utterly  shocked.  “Don’t  people  do  that  in  every
country?”
The way we are conditioned to see the world in our own
culture seems so completely obvious and commonplace that
it is difficult to imagine that another culture might do things
differently.  It  is  only  when  you  start  to  identify  what  is
typical in your culture, but different from others, that you
can  begin  to  open  a  dialogue  of  sharing,  learning,  and
ultimately understanding.
Of  course,  this  book  is  not  about  babies,  but  about
business. Yet the same rule applies: It is only when you start
to identify what makes your culture different from others
that you can begin to open a dialogue of sharing, learning,
and ultimately understanding.
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER: THE CULTURE
MAP
Start by plotting your culture using the eight scales. You’ll
then have a map to compare your culture to those of your
business partners. You can see how it works from the e-mail
exchange I had with a French participant who had recently
finished my course:
Hi, Erin.
After attending your presentation at our annual
conference last week, I’ve been thinking about the

invisible cultural boundaries impacting the
effectiveness of my global team.
As you know, I’m a vice president at automotive
supplier Valeo—a French company with big client
bases in Germany and Japan, and a growing presence
in China. I work frequently in all four countries and
have people from each on my team.
When I moved to China, I thought the difficulty would
be in bridging the cultural differences between Asians
and Europeans. And it is true that the Asian members
of my team are uncomfortable with the way our
French and German members publicly disagree with
them and give them negative feedback. I’ve coached
the team members on how to moderate their
approaches and reactions to work more effectively
together.
But to my surprise, the most serious difficulties we
have on the team are between the Chinese and the
Japanese. The Chinese gripe that the Japanese are
slow to make decisions, inflexible, and unwilling to
change. The Japanese complain that the Chinese don’t
think things through, make rash decisions, and seem
to thrive in chaos. Not only do these two Asian groups
have difficulty working together, but the Japanese in
many ways behave more like the Germans than like
the Chinese—something I never anticipated.
I’d appreciate any thoughts and suggestions you may
have.
Olivier
My response:
Dear Olivier,

Start addressing your problem by creating a simple
culture map using the scales outlined during my
presentation. Plot out each culture on the eight scales
and draw a broken line connecting all eight points.
This line represents the overall pattern of that culture
on the map. I’ve done that for you with the four
cultures from your team.

FIGURE E.1.
Now check the lines for Japan and China. On several
scales, they cluster together. As you’ve experienced,
the Chinese and Japanese are both uncomfortable
with direct negative feedback and open disagreement.
That reflects the fact that, on scales two (Evaluating)
and seven (Disagreeing), the Europeans cluster on
one side and the Asian cultures on the other. Still, in
most cases, the Japanese perceive the Chinese as very
direct—note the difference between these cultures on

scale two (Evaluating). The French see the Germans
in the same way.
Next, take a closer look at scales five (Deciding) and
eight (Scheduling), and you’ll see the likely source of
the frustration on your team. Although Japan, like
China, is very hierarchical (scale four, Leading), it’s a
consensual society where decisions are often made by
the group in a bottom-up manner. That means
decisions take longer, as input from everyone is
gathered and a collective decision is formed. By
contrast, in China, decisions are most often made by
the boss in a top-down fashion (scale five, Deciding).
Furthermore, the Japanese have a linear-time culture
(scale 8, Scheduling). They build plans carefully and
stick to the plan. Being organized, structured, and on
time are all values that the Japanese share with their
linear-time German colleagues. Indeed, on both scales
five (Deciding) and eight (Scheduling), the Japanese
are rather close to the German culture, farther from
France and quite far from China.
In comparison, the Chinese tend to make decisions
quickly and to change plans often and easily, valuing
flexibility and adaptability over sticking to the plan.
On these two scales (Deciding and Scheduling), the
Chinese are closer to the French than to the Japanese.
Given these differences, it’s understandable that your
Japanese and Chinese team members are having
difficulty working together. Can the problem be
solved? Absolutely. The next step in improving these
dynamics is to increase the awareness of your team
members about how culture impacts their
effectiveness.

Have your team read a couple of chapters from this
book, or describe a few of the concepts yourself. Then
discuss cultural differences at one of your team
meetings or over a team dinner. Ask questions like:
• Do you agree with the positions as outlined in
this chapter? Why or why not?
• What else can you share with the group so that
we better understand your own culture’s
positioning on this scale?
• Do you think these concepts are impacting our
team’s collaboration?
• What can we do to be more effective, given
these differences?
It doesn’t matter whether your team members agree
with what they’ve read; what’s important is to start
exploring and discussing the differences in value
systems and work methods. Just as fish don’t know
they’re in water, people often find it difficult to see
and recognize their own culture until they start
comparing it with others.
Be sure to conduct the discussion with humility and
without judgment. The more you can joke about your
own culture and speak positively about the ways other
cultures operate, the easier it will be for everyone to
share their thoughts and opinions without becoming
defensive.
The more aware the team becomes of how culture is
impacting their work, the more effective they will be
at bridging the differences. The French expression
Quand on connait sa maladie, on est a moitié guérie
(Once you identify your sickness, you are halfway
cured) certainly applies to multicultural teamwork.
Help your team articulate the cultural differences that

are impacting their effectiveness, and they will begin
to work better together.
I hope some of these ideas will help improve your
team effectiveness. Please keep in touch and let me
know how it goes.
Erin
BRIDGING THE FAULT LINES
If you face cultural challenges similar to those that troubled
Olivier, try applying the same strategy. Create a culture map
that  enables  an  easy  visual  comparison  of  the  various
cultures  represented  in  your  team.  Noting  the  points  of
similarity and difference will help you recognize the fault
lines  that  may  be  dividing  your  team  members—invisible
psychological boundaries that separate groups, creating an
“us versus them” mentality.
As you build your own awareness, you will be better able
to  act  as  a  cultural  bridge.  Help  your  team  members
develop  their cultural  flexibility  by  coaching  them  to
suspend  their  judgments  and  see  the  situation  from  an
opposing perspective.
When  invisible  cultural  barriers  impact  a  global  team,
you’ll  often  find  that  each  group  is  frustrated  with  the
other’s approach. The more they complain, the bigger the
fault line becomes. One way you can deal with this is by
organizing  the  team  so  that  there  is  less  cultural
homogeneity at each location. This can help to break down
the us-versus-them divide. Olivier, for example, might want
to  have  Germans,  French,  and  Chinese  all  living  and
working together in Japan. It can also be helpful to rotate
your  team  members  when  possible  so  a  number  of  them
spend a few months, or even years, at other locations.
Another valuable step is hiring people who are bicultural
or have extensive experience living in more than one culture

represented on your team. If you make a good choice and
train that person well, he can play a critical role in helping
one group decode the other’s behavior.
Sometimes  cultural  diversity  on  global  teams  creates
fault lines, but other times that same level of diversity can
be a great advantage. For example, suppose you are handed
a project that has dozens of drop-dead deadlines and that
therefore requires a linear-time approach. Get those people
on your team with strong linear-time preferences to own
that  project.  Another  time  you  may  have  a  client  who  is
constantly changing his mind and serving him well requires
flexibility and comfort with changing routes at the drop of a
hat. Having team members who are strongly flexible-time
(both because of their culture as well as their personalities)
will help meet your client’s needs.
Sometimes,  you  may  feel  as  if  you  really  need  direct
negative feedback about how to improve something that you
can’t get right. Having people with a frank feedback style
who are from direct cultures on the Evaluating scale will be
invaluable. At other times, you might need a small group of
people to give negative feedback to a sensitive and valued
client  and  to  do  it  with  the  utmost  delicacy.  Here  is  an
opportunity to call on the strength of those individuals who
are pros at indirect negative feedback.
So when you look at your team’s culture map, consider
not just the difficulties that might arise from the gaps but
also  the  strengths  that  the  differences  may  provide.
Managed with care, the cultural and individual diversity can
become your team’s greatest asset.
WE ARE ALL THE SAME, WE ARE ALL
DIFFERENT
During a course on multicultural negotiations, a young MBA
student from Ukraine approached me during a break and
asked me urgently, “Erin, you have been talking about the
importance  of  cultural  differences,  yet  I  have  always

believed that no matter where we come from, humans are
fundamentally all the same. Isn’t this true?”
Later  that  morning,  I  was  buttonholed  by  a  group  of
students from India who had been talking excitedly. “We are
in the middle of a debate,” one of them declared. “As we
have seen this morning, culture seems to have a big impact
on business behavior. Yet last week, our whole class took a
personality assessment, and we saw that the six of us—who
are all from the same part of India—each have very different
personalities. Isn’t every individual different?”
The answer to both of these questions is, of course, yes.
It’s true that human beings are fundamentally the same.
At a deep level, no matter where we come from, people are
driven  by  common  physiological  and  psychological  needs
and motivations. When we are nervous or elated, we all find
our  hearts  beating  faster.  When  we  are  gloomy  or
depressed, we all feel enervated and exhausted. We all feel
common  human  emotions  such  as  jealousy,  excitement,
sorrow, and passion. At a deep level, we are all the same
species.  In  this  sense,  no  matter  which  culture  we  come
from, humans are the same.
And, yes, every individual is different. Even when raised
in the same community, by the same parents, working in the
same  environment,  no  two  individuals  are  precisely  the
same; each of us has a unique style and set of preferences,
interests, aversions, and values.
So no matter who you are working with or where that
person comes from, you should begin any relationship with
the desire to understand what is specific and unique to that
individual. Don’t assume that you can determine anything
specific about how they will think or behave from what you
know about their cultural background.
Yet  the  culture  in  which  we  grow  up  has  a  profound
impact  on  how  we  see  the  world.  In  any  given  culture,
members  are  conditioned  to  understand  the  world  in  a
particular  way,  to  see  certain  communication  patterns  as
effective  or  undesirable,  to  find  certain  arguments

persuasive  or  lacking  merit,  to  consider  certain  ways  of
making decisions or measuring time “natural” or “strange.”
Leaders  have  always  needed  to  understand  human
nature  and  personality  differences  to  be  successful  in
business—that’s  nothing  new.  What’s  new  is  the
requirement for twenty-first century leaders to be prepared
to understand a wider, richer array of work styles than ever
before  and  to  be  able  to  determine  what  aspects  of  an
interaction are simply a result of personality and which are
a result of differences in cultural perspective.
When we worked in offices surrounded by others from
our  own  tribe,  awareness  of  basic  human  psychological
needs and motivations, as well as a sensitivity to individual
differences was enough. But as globalization transforms the
way we work, we now need the ability to decode cultural
differences  in  order  to  work  effectively  with  clients,
suppliers, and colleagues from around the world.
Challenging? Yes! But it’s also fascinating. The range of
human  cultures  can  be  a  source  of  endless  surprise  and
discovery—a fount of remarkable experiences and continual
learning that can never be exhausted.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Like most authors, I owe an enormous debt of gratitude to
a number of people whose help and support have made this
book possible.
Thanks first of all to my excellent editor at PublicAffairs,
John Mahaney. John managed to see promise in a first book
chapter, which was very rough. He provided careful and
insightful  guidance  throughout  the  writing  process.  He
encouraged me to write from my own viewpoint, and he
showed me, paragraph by paragraph, how to put color into
my storytelling and make my examples more engaging. It
wouldn’t be the same book without John.
A big ribbon-wrapped thanks to my literary agent, Carol
Franco, who has also had an enormous impact on this book.
Not only did Carol find the best publisher I could hope for,
she  stood  beside  me  through  two  years  of  trials  and
uncertainty. When I needed advice from an expert, Carol
was always ready and waiting with supportive and lucid
guidance.
Thanks  to  Karl  Weber,  a  terrific  editor,  who  took  a
manuscript  that  was  often  too  long  and  frequently  too
wordy and gave it a serious polish. If it weren’t for Karl,
this book would be a whole lot more dull. It is thanks to him
that the reader was saved multiple painful anecdotes such
as  the  one  about  the  fly  who  buzzed  around  the  world
viewing classrooms in different countries and the man who

visited a doctor in rural China to get help with his foot only
to have the doctor look at his tongue.
Thanks  also  to  Elin  Williams,  the  writer  and  editor
whose  assistance  first  made  me  realize  that  with  really
good help, I could write a book. Elin invested much time in
learning about my work before we even started and then
helped me through the entire first draft, skillfully editing
every chapter.
Thanks to Stuart Crainer and Des Dearlove, who helped
me get this project off the ground in the first place. They
worked with me to outline the book’s content and sketch
out the various chapters. Stuart and Des came up with the
book title and wrote the first draft of the book proposal.
They read versions of the first few chapters many times and
provided support in the early days.
Thanks to my mother, Linda Burkett, not only because
she has been a fundamental point of love and support for
forty-two years, but because she has read versions of each
chapter far more times than anyone else. She has been my
professional  confidante  all  along  the  way,  weighing  each
example  I  was  uncertain  about,  fixing  any  passage  I
couldn’t get quite right, and taking phone calls at 6:00 a.m.
to weigh in on a new title idea or yet another cover design.
Next to myself, my mother is the person who has devoted
the most time to this book.
Now  to  the  rest  of  my  family,  who  put  up  with  me
throughout  an  arduous  and  sometimes  trying  process.  I
owe you a heartfelt thank you, which doesn’t have anything
specific to do with the book but everything to do with the
daily  support  you  provide  for  all  I  do.  I  couldn’t  have
written this book without the support of my gaggle of boys
—my husband, Eric, and our two sons, Ethan and Logan.
The three of you are the foundation of everything good in
my life. A big thanks to my father, Tim, who has taught me
to be tenacious, and through his unwavering belief in me
has  taught  me  to  believe  in  myself.  Thanks  also  to  my
brother Jed and his wife, Seema, for demonstrating how to

meet  life’s  unexpected  challenges  with  grace  and
persistence. And a thank you to my close friend Jennifer,
whose multicultural journey has often paralleled my own.
When I finished the first draft of this book, I was excited to
get  feedback.  I  sent  the  manuscript  out  to  a  number  of
colleagues  who  have  specific  expertise  in  various  world
regions. Each of them painstakingly read the manuscript
and provided corrections and suggestions. Thanks to Mary
Yoko  Brannen,  Elisabeth  Shen,  Edith  Coron,  Philippe
Aboubadra,  Monika  Stok,  Sabine  Havenstein,  Stanislav
Shekshnia, Martina Harms, and Gisela Henrique for all the
time you devoted to this project.
The team at PublicAffairs has consistently exceeded all
of  my  expectations.  Thank  you  to  Jaime  Leifer,  Melissa
Veronesi, Melissa Raymond, Victoria Gilder, and the many
other individuals who have given their care and attention to
this book.
Thanks also to the people who inspired me. Thanks to
Geert Hofstede, Fons Trompenaars, and Edward Hall, who
were writing about this subject long before me and whose
work provided the foundation for many of the concepts in
this book. Thank you to Henry Zinglersen, who introduced
me to many of the concepts that appear in this book. It was
Henry’s early mentoring that led me to the eight scales.
Thanks to my colleague and mentor at INSEAD, Herminia
Ibarra,  who  encouraged  me  to  write  this  book  and  had
enough  faith  in  my  work  to  introduce  me  to  both  Elin
Williams and Carol Franco.
Most  of  all,  thanks  to  the  thousands  of  executive
students who have participated in my sessions and shared
their experiences and perspectives, both inside and outside
of INSEAD, thus providing the basis for every example and
strategy present in this book.

NOTES

INTRODUCTION
1. I first heard this analogy from my colleague and
mentor, Professor Jose Santos, who speaks about the
similarity between culture and water in his courses. The
analogy is also referenced in the book by Fons
Trompenaars and Charles Hampden-Turner, Riding the
Waves of Culture: Understanding Diversity in Global
Business, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1998), who
wrote: “A fish only discovers its need for water when it is no
longer in it. Our own culture is like water to a fish. We live
and breathe through it.” Just recently, after the first draft of
this book was complete, author Kai Hammerich and
Richard Lewis titled their new book after this analogy, Fish
Can’t See Water: How National Culture Can Make or Break
Your Corporate Strategy (Wiley, 2013).

CHAPTER 1
1. Edward T. Hall, Beyond Culture (1976; New York:
Anchor Books, 1989), 85–125.
2. This same dialogue in various formats has been told
to me several times. The first time was by Denise Austin
Guillon, an American consultant living in Paris, who
included a similar dialogue in a presentation I attended
many years ago.

CHAPTER 2
1. This translation guide has been circulated in various
forms anonymously on the Internet. One idea is that it was
originally developed by Shell Oil Co. to help their
employees better understand one another.
2. Adapted from Vladimir Zhelvis, Xenophobe’s Guide to
the Russians (2001; London: Oval Books, 2010).
CHAPTER 3
1. Richard Nisbett, The Geography of Thought (New
York: The Free Press, 2003), 48–78.
2. Richard Nisbett and Takahiko Masuda, “Culture and
Point of View” (Special series of Inaugural Articles by
members of the National Academy of Sciences), PNAS 100,
no. 19 (September 2003): 11163–11170.

CHAPTER 4
1. Geert Hofstede, Gert Jan Hofstede, and Michael
Minkov, Cultures and Organizations: Software of the Mind
(1991; New York: McGraw Hill, 2010), 53–88.
2. Robert House, Paul Hanges, Mansour Javidan, Peter
Dorfman, and Vipin Gupta, Culture, Leadership, and
Organizations: The GLOBE Study of 62 Societies (Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage), 513–563.
3. André Laurent, “The Cross-Cultural Puzzle of
International Human Resource Management,” Human
Resource Management 25, no. 1 (Spring 1986): 91–102.

CHAPTER 5
1. Patrick Lencioni is the author of ten business books
including best sellers The Five Dysfunctions of a Team (San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2002), and The Advantage: Why
Organizational Health Trumps Everything Else in Business
(San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass), 2012.
2. For more about the Japanese decision-making
process, see Sue Shinomiya and Brian Szepkowski,
Passport to Japan: Revised and Updated Edition (Berkeley,
CA: Stonebridge Press, 2007), 100–103.
3. Many of these recommendations first appeared in Dr.
Ernest Gundling, Communicating with the Japanese in
Business, distributed by JETRO, 1999, 10–11.

CHAPTER 6
1. Roy Y. J. Chua, “Building Effective Business
Relationships in China,” MIT Sloan Management Review
53, no. 4 (Summer 2012), and Crystal Jiang, Roy Y. J. Chua,
Masaaki Kotabe, and Janet Murray, “Effects of Cultural
Ethnicity, Firm Size, and Firm Age on Senior Executives’
Trust in Their Overseas Business Partners: Evidence from
China,” Journal of International Business Studies 42, no. 9
(2011): 1150–1173. Roy Y. J. Chua, Michael W. Morris and
Paul Ingram, “Guanxi vs. Networking: Distinctive
Configurations of Affect-and Cognition-based Trust in the
Networks of Chinese vs. American Managers,” Journal of
International Business Studies (2009) 40, 490–508. doi:
10.1057/palgrave.jibs.8400422.
2. Kurt Lewin, “Some Social-Psychological Differences
between the United States and Germany,” Character and
Personality 4 (1936).
3. Fons Trompenaars and Charles Hampden-Turner,
Riding the Waves of Culture: Understanding Diversity in
Global Business, 2nd ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1998),
83–86.
4. Roderick Swaab, William Maddux, and Marwan
Sinaceur, “Virtual Linguistic Mimicry: When and How
Online Mimicry Increases Negotiation Outcomes,” Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology 47 (2011): 616–621.

CHAPTER 7
1. Suleman Shahid, Emiel Krahmer, and Marc Swerts,
Fun and Games: Springer Proceedings of the Second
Edition of the International Conference (Eindhoven, the
Netherlands: 2008, Series: Springer—LNCS). Book chapter
“Alone or Together: Exploring the Effect of Physical Co-
presence on the Emotional Expressions of Game Playing
Children Across Cultures,” 94–105.

CHAPTER 8
1. Edward T. Hall, The Dance of Life: The Other
Dimension of Time (1983; New York: Anchor Books, 1989),
44–58.
2. Robert Levine, The Geography of Time: The Temporal
Misadventures of a Social Psychologist (New York: Basic
Books, 1997), 81–100.
3. This evergreen line was written about in the New York
Times by Anand Giridharads, “Getting In and Out of Line,”
New York Times, August 7, 2010.

INDEX
Africa, 220, 227, 227 (fig.)
communication and, 31
oral tradition in, 58
Americans, 26, 213
business culture of, 7–10
hierarchical culture of, 144
humor and, 44–46
Midwestern, 32
negative feedback and, 69–72, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 76, 77–80
persuasion and, 89–93, 107–112, 108 (fig.), 109 (fig.)
social customs of, 174–183
on trust, 169–170, 175
written reports and, 57–59
Anglo-Dutch Translation Guide, 67, 67 (fig.)
Anglo-Saxon, 227, 227 (fig.)
communication, 31–32
cultures, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 47
language cluster, 40–41, 41 (fig.)
on persuading scale, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
school system, 94
Antithesis, 99–100

Arabic culture
as emotionally expressive, 207–209
wasta (connections that create preferences) in, 190
Argentina, 31
high-context communication and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
negative feedback and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
Aristotle, 97, 110

Asian languages
cluster of, 40–41, 41 (fig.)
saying “no” in, 50–51
Asians, 187–189, 213, 227–228, 227 (fig.)
assumptions regarding, 4–6
communication and, 31
differences among, 12–13
hierarchical culture of, 129–131, 131 (fig.)
high-context communication and, 47–49
negative feedback and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 82–87
oral tradition of, 58
persuasion and, 104–112, 108 (fig.), 109 (fig.)

Assumptions
regarding Asians and Westerners, 4–6
shared, 35–37
Astellas, 154, 156
Australia, 138
low-context communication and, 34, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
on persuading scale, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
trusting scale and, 171 (fig.), 172
Austria, 178

Authority
aura of, 122–123
respect and, 139–140
Bacon, Francis, 97
Bacon, Roger, 97
Bae Pak, 112
Belgium, 96–97, 96 (fig.)
Bieber, Justin, 93
Brainstorming, 212
Brazil, 31, 233–235
high-context communication and, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 55
trust in, 163–165, 170, 175–176
trusting scale and, 171–172, 171 (fig.)
BRIC countries, 171–174, 171 (fig.)
Brown, David, 32–34
Buddhism, 110–111
Business, 6, 170
leading scale and, 121–122
philosophy and, 97–101
power distance and, 121–122
practice of clarification, 46–47
relationships outside of, 106
thinking, 111–112

Business culture
of Americans, 7–10
of France, 7–10, 123
of Israel, 16–18, 17 (fig.)
of Russia, 16–18, 17 (fig.)
of U.S., 7–10
Cambodia, 70

Canada
as low-context, 34, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
on persuading scale, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
Case method, 102
Catholicism, 128–129
Children, 38, 243–244
China, communication and, 35–36
feedback and, 79
of Holland, 201–204, 202–203 (fig.)
India, communication and, 35–36
Japan, communication and, 35–36
of Pakistan, 201–204, 202–203 (fig.)
China, 124, 213, 236–237, 245–247, 246 (fig.)
children and communication in, 35–36
communication in, 31
in disagreeing scale, 201 (fig.), 209
feedback in, 65
guanxi (relationships) in, 166–167, 173
high-context communication and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 48–51
negative feedback and, 69–70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 85
nianzi (face) in, 198–200
trust in, 165–167, 169–170, 188–189
trusting scale and, 171–174, 171 (fig.)
Chua, Roy, 168–169

Clarification
asking for, 49, 51–54
business practice of, 46–47
repetition and, 51
Collaboration, 239
improving, 76–77
strategies for multiculturalism, 54–57, 103–104, 114
Communicating scale in eight-scale model, 16, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
by language, 40–41, 41 (fig.)
negative feedback, evaluating scale and, 62, 69–72, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
ranking of cultures within, 39–41, 39 (fig.)
relativity within, 44–49

Communication
China, children and, 35–36
effective, 31–32
explicit and literal, 31–32
in France, 31, 61–62
implicit, 31–32
India, children and, 35–36
Japan, children and, 35–36
level-hopping and, 134–139
styles of, 32–36, 37–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)

Communicator
bad, 42–45
Brown as, 33–34
good, 31, 42–45
Meyer, Erin as low-context, 42–43
Confucianism, 110–111, 129–130, 132, 198–199, 209
Consulting firm, 15, 67–69, 67 (fig.)

Criticism
downgrading, 66
negative, 69–72, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
receiving, 62–65
Cultural relativity, concept of, 21–24, 21 (fig.), 23 (fig.)
Culture, 249–253
communicating scale and ranking of, 39–41, 39 (fig.)
contextual cues regarding, 10–12
decoding, 12
diversities, 229–251
eight-scale model and, 15–21, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
heterogeneous backgrounds and, 23–24
high-context communication and, 34, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 50–52
impact of, 10–14
language and, 37–40, 39 (fig.)
low-context communication and, 34, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
map and eight-scale model, 16–18, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
miscommunication and, 8–10
monochronic, 224–225
national, 24–26
polychronic, 224–225
protective instinct towards, 24–26
See also Egalitarian culture; Hierarchical culture; specific cultures
DaimlerChrysler, 205–207
The Dance of Life: The Other Dimension of Time (Hall), 224
Dark and light. See Yin and yang
de Groot, Karl, 134–135

Deciding scale
consensual on, 150–153, 150 (fig.)
in eight-scale model, 16, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
Sweden and, 150 (fig.), 151–153
top-down on, 150–153, 150 (fig.)
Decision-making
consensual, 145–150, 149 (fig.), 158–159
in egalitarian culture, 145–146
in Germany, 144–148, 150, 150 (fig.)
in hierarchical culture, 145–146
individual or top-down, 146, 149, 149 (fig.), 159–160
Ringi system on, 154–158
styles of, 148–150, 149 (fig.), 158–161
in U.S., 144–148, 150–153, 150 (fig.)
Denmark, 201, 201 (fig.), 207
egalitarian, 116–117, 123, 125 (fig.), 126, 128
low-context communication and, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Descartes, René, 98
Dialectic model of deduction, 98

Disagreeing
agreeably strategies, 210–216
confrontation and, 106–107, 197–210
debating and, 195–197
by playing devil’s advocate, 216–218

Disagreeing scale
avoiding confrontation, 204, 204 (fig.), 207–209
China in, 201 (fig.), 209
confrontational, 200–204, 201 (fig.)
in eight-scale model, 16, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)

Downgraders
U.K.’s usage of, 67–69, 67 (fig.)
words of, 65–66
Edmondson, Lou, 42

Egalitarian culture
decision-making in, 145–146
of Denmark, 116–117, 123, 125 (fig.), 126, 128
of Holland, 118–119
of Iceland, 128
of Israel, 16–18, 17 (fig.)
leading scale and, 125–131, 125 (fig.), 127 (fig.), 131 (fig.)
level-hopping and, 134–139
management in, 132–133
of Sweden, 128
Eight-scale model
culture and, 15–21, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
culture map and, 16–18, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
See also specific scales
E-mail
etiquette, 47
exchange of, 11, 151–153, 189–193, 244–249
protocols, 137–138
recaps via, 58
Spain and, 47
structure of, 99–100
En flyktning krysser sitt spor (Sandemose), 116–117
English
as low-context, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Epictetus, 26
European Union, 98
Europeans, 227, 227 (fig.)
leading scale and, 125–129, 125 (fig.), 127 (fig.), 131 (fig.)
negative feedback and, 69–70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
See also Latin Europeans

Evaluating scale
communicating scale, negative feedback and, 62, 69–71, 69 (fig.), 72
(fig.)
in eight-scale model, 16, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
Netherlands and, 20–21, 21 (fig.)
performance appraisals and, 62
U.K. and, 20–21, 21 (fig.)
Feedback, 80–82
in China, 65
direct, 62–65, 69–72, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
evaluation strategies, 80–81
in France, 8–10
high-context communication and, 62
indirect, 64–65, 69–72, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
low-context communication and, 62
positive, 8–10, 81
strategies, 84–87
styles, 20–21, 21 (fig.)
360-degree, 116
in U.S., 8–10
Feedback, negative, 8–10, 12
Americans and, 69–72, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 76, 77–80
Argentina and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
Asians and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 82–87
Cambodia and, 70
China and, 69–70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 85
communicating scale, evaluating scale and, 62, 69–72, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
Europeans and, 69–70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
France and, 69 (fig.), 70, 72 (fig.), 78–82
Germany and, 68–69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 78
high-context and direct, 72 (fig.), 74–77
high-context and indirect, 72 (fig.), 81–86
India and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 87
Indonesia and, 70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 83–87
Israel and, 69 (fig.), 71, 72 (fig.)
Japan and, 70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
Korea and, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 85–87
Latin Americans and, 69–70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
low-context and direct, 71–73, 72 (fig.)
low-context and indirect, 72 (fig.), 77–81
Mexico and, 72 (fig.), 82
Netherlands and, 62–65, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 72–73, 78–79, 87
Russia and, 69–70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 74–78
Singapore and, 69 (fig.), 70–71, 72 (fig.)
South Americans and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
Spain and, 69 (fig.), 70, 72 (fig.), 78
Thailand and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 85
U.K. and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 76
Finland, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)

Flexibility, 104, 137
France, 193, 245, 246 (fig.), 247–249
business culture of, 7–10, 123
communication in, 31, 61–62
debating and, 195–197
feedback in, 8–10
high-context communication and, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 47
idioms of, 37–38, 77, 249
negative feedback and, 69 (fig.), 70, 72 (fig.), 78–82
on persuading scale, 96–97, 96 (fig.)
recaps and, 46–47
scheduling and, 22–23, 23 (fig.), 221–222
school system of, 79, 99, 200
second-degree messages in, 38–39
sous-entendu (under the heard) and, 37–38
A Fugitive Crosses His Tracks. See En flyktning krysser sitt spor
Gerdau, Hugo, 163
Gerdau, Joo, 163
Gerdau S.A., 163–165
Germany, 201, 201 (fig.), 204 (fig.), 205–207, 245–257, 246 (fig.)
decision-making in, 144–148, 150, 150 (fig.)
low-context communication and, 34, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 58–59
negative feedback and, 68–69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 78
on persuading scale, 96–97, 96 (fig.)
persuasion styles of, 89–93
on power, 148
scheduling and, 18–19, 19 (fig.), 20 (fig.), 22–23, 23 (fig.), 220, 226, 232–
233
Globe Project, 121
Gutierres, Anne-Hélène, 122–123
Halim Perdanakusuma Airport, 66–67
Hall, Edward T., 41, 224, 225
Hampden-Turner, Charles, 175
Hegel, Freidrich, 98
Heineken, 119
Hierarchical culture, 105–106
of Americans, 144
of Asians, 129–131, 131 (fig.)
decision-making in, 145–146
leading scale and, 125–131, 125 (fig.), 127 (fig.), 131 (fig.)
level-hopping and, 134–139
of Mexico, 119–120, 141
of Russia, 16–18, 17 (fig.), 117–118, 142
High-context communication
Argentina and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Asians and, 47–49
Brazil and, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 55
China and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 48–51
culture and, 34, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 50–52

education and, 43
feedback and, 62
France and, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 47
with high-context culture, 55–57
Hindi and, 37
India and, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Indonesia and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 58–59
Iran and, 36, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Italy and, 39, 39 (fig.), 47
Japan and, 37, 39, 39 (fig.)
Kenya and, 31, 39–40, 39 (fig.)
Korea and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Latin and, 39, 39 (fig.)
with low-context culture, 54–57
Mexico and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 55–57
oral tradition and, 58–59
perceptions regarding, 42–44
Portugal and, 39, 39 (fig.)
repetition in, 51
Romance languages and, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Russia and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Saudi Arabia and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 55–57
Singapore and, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Spain and, 39, 39 (fig.), 47
strategies, 50–52, 54–57
Hindi, 37

History
language and, 37, 40–41, 41 (fig.)
shared, 35, 40–41, 41 (fig.)
Hofstede, Geert, 120–124
Holland, 145, 207
children of, 201–204, 202 (fig.)–203 (fig.)
egalitarian, 118–119, 134–136
Homogeneity, 41, 41 (fig.)
House, Robert, 121
Humility, 88
Humor, 44–46
Hungary, 105–106
IBM. See International Business Machines
Iceland, 128

Idioms
French, 37–39, 77
Portuguese, 39
Spanish, 39
India, 251
behaviors in, 11–12
children and communication in, 35–36
communication in, 31–32
evergreen tree culture of, 228–230, 241
getting directions in, 29–31
half-shake or half-nod in, 11–12
high-context communication and, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
negative feedback and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 87
outsourcing to, 52–53
scheduling and, 22–23, 23 (fig.), 220
trusting scale and, 171–172, 171 (fig.), 180
Indian Institute of Planning and Management, 52–53
Individualism, 12–14
Indonesia, 199
communication in, 31
high-context communication and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 58–59
negative feedback and, 70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 83–86
trusting scale and, 171 (fig.), 172
INSEAD, 232, 238
campus, 15
faculty members, 43, 215
International Business Machines (IBM), 121
Iran, 36, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)

Israel
business culture of, 16–18, 17 (fig.)
egalitarian, 16–18, 17 (fig.)
negative feedback and, 69 (fig.), 70–71, 72 (fig.)

Italy
communication in, 31
high-context communication and, 39, 39 (fig.), 47
leading scale and, 125 (fig.), 126
recaps and, 46–47
Japan, 187–189, 198–200, 213, 236, 246 (fig.), 247–248
children and communication in, 35–36
communication in, 31–34, 55
high-context communication and, 37, 39, 39 (fig.)
KY in, 33–34
negative feedback and, 70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
persuasion and, 108–109, 109 (fig.), 112–113
Ringi system of, 154–158 words of, 37
Job descriptions, 57
Johannpeter, Curt, 163
Keillor, Garrison, 195
Kenya, 31, 39–40, 39 (fig.)
Kia Motor Company, 112
Kong Rong, 129
Korea, 145, 188, 198, 201 (fig.), 209
high-context communication and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
negative feedback and, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 85–87
KPMG, 22–23, 23 (fig.), 67
Krahmer, Emiel, 201
Kuuki yomenai (KY), 33–34
KY. See Kuuki yomenai
La Fontaine, Jean de, 38

Language
clusters, 40–41, 41 (fig.)
communicating scale by, 40–41, 41 (fig.)
culture and, 37–40, 39 (fig.)
history and, 37, 40–41, 41 (fig.)
See also specific languages
Latin, 39, 39 (fig.)
Latin Americans, 107, 183, 227, 227 (fig.)
communication and, 31
negative feedback and, 69–70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
on persuading scale, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
school system of, 94
Latin Europeans, 227, 227 (fig.)
communication and, 31
humor and, 46
on persuading scale, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
school system of, 94
Laurent, André, 126–127
Law of Jante, 116–117

Leader
answers and, 126–127, 127 (fig.)
effective and good, 101, 115–120
ineffective and weak, 118
paternalistic, 130–131, 142
roles of, 12, 139–142
symbolic gestures of, 133

Leading scale
business and, 121–122
egalitarian culture and, 125–131, 125 (fig.), 127 (fig.), 131 (fig.)
in eight-scale model, 16, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
Europeans and, 125–129, 125 (fig.), 127 (fig.), 131 (fig.)
factors affecting, 125–131, 125 (fig.), 127 (fig.), 131 (fig.)
hierarchical culture and, 125–131, 125 (fig.), 127 (fig.), 131 (fig.)
Italy and, 125 (fig.), 126
Spain and, 125 (fig.), 126
Sweden and, 125 (fig.), 126
Legal system, 184–185
of European Union, 98
of U.S., 98
Levine, Robert, 225
Levity, property of, 110
Lewin, Kurt, 175
L’Oreal, 197
Low-context communication
Australia and, 34, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Canada and, 34, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
as clear, explicit, simple and transparent, 34, 53–54
culture and, 34, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Denmark and, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
education and, 43
feedback and, 62
Finland, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Germany and, 34, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 58–59
with low-context culture, 54–57
managers and, 51
Meyer, Erin and, 42–43
Netherlands and, 34, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 42
perceptions regarding, 42–44
philosophy of, 35
Poland, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
strategies, 52–57
U.K. and, 34, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
U.S. and, 34, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
writing and, 57–59
Maersk, 115
Management by objectives, 116, 141
Masuda, Takahiko, 107–109, 108 (fig.)
Merck Pharmaceuticals, 96

Messages
blurring, 83–87
second-degree, 38–39
traditional rule for, 35
Mexico, 214–215
communication in, 31
hierarchical culture of, 119–120, 141
high-context communication
and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 55–57
negative feedback and, 72 (fig.), 82
Meyer, Eric, 196, 217–218
Meyer, Erin, 205
background of, 14
courses by, 83–86, 105, 108 (fig.), 109 (fig.)
e-mail exchanges of, 244–249
extensive education program of, 62–65
as low-context communicator, 42–43
at Paris training conference, 32–34
Michelin, 99
Middle East, 191, 207–209, 220, 227, 227 (fig.)
Minnesota, 32, 176
Miscommunication, 8–10, 54–57
Moody, Eric, 66–67
Morocco, 145

Multiculturalism
collaboration strategies for, 54–57, 103–104, 114
low-context processes and, 55–57
persuasion and, 89–93, 101–104, 114
Napoleonic code, 98
Native American, 41
Nemawashi (root-binding), 157
Nestlé, 83–86, 165–167
Netherlands, 138, 201, 201 (fig.), 204 (fig.), 205
evaluating scale and, 20–21, 21 (fig.)
low-context communication and, 34, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 42
negative feedback and, 62–65, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 72–73, 78, 87
on persuading scale, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
New York Stock Exchange Euronext, 193
New Zealand, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
Nigeria, 184–185, 226–227, 227 (fig.), 232–233
Nisbett, Richard, 107–110, 108 (fig.), 109 (fig.)
Novo Nordisk, 210–212
Oberoi Hotel, 29–31
Objectives, written, 58
Organizational charts, 57
Outsourcing, 27
Owens Corning, 32
Pakistan, 201–204, 202–203 (fig.)
Performance appraisals, 58
evaluating scale and, 62
Personality traits, 13

Persuading scale
Anglo-Saxons on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
Australia on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
Belgium on, 96–97, 96 (fig.)
Canada on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
country positions on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
in eight-scale model, 16, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
France on, 96–97, 96 (fig.)
Germany on, 96–97, 96 (fig.)
Latin Americans on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
Latin Europeans on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
Netherlands on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
New Zealand on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
Russia on, 96–97, 96 (fig.)
Scandinavia on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
strategies, 104
U.K. on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
U.S. on, 95–97, 96 (fig.)

Persuasion
Americans and, 89–93, 107–112, 108 (fig.), 109 (fig.)
Asians and, 104–112, 108 (fig.), 109 (fig.)
holistic approach towards, 104–112, 108 (fig.), 109 (fig.)
increasing effectiveness of, 112–113
Japan and, 108–109, 109 (fig.), 112–113
multiculturalism and, 89–93, 101–104, 114
Taiwanese and, 108–109
Peru, 203–204
Peugeot Citroën, 1–6
Philippines, 66, 203–204

Philosophy
business and, 97–101
of low-context communication, 35
Western, 109–112
Poland, 39, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Politeness, 87
Portugal, 31
high-context communication and, 39, 39 (fig.)
idioms, 38–39

Power distance
business and, 121–122
concept of, 120–124
high or low, 125, 142
Prairie Home Companion (radio show), 195
Ranato, Flavio, 222–224, 240
Reading the air, 34, 40

Reasoning
applications-first, 93–95, 102–104
deductive, 93–95
inductive, 93–95
principles-first, 93–95, 102–104
styles of, 92–95
See also Persuading scale

Recaps
at end of discussion, 54
France and, 46–47
Italy and, 46–47
of key points, 56–57
Spain and, 46–47
U.K. and, 46–47
via e-mail, 58
written, 56
Relationship
-based and trusting scale, 170–174, 171 (fig.), 180–181, 183–185
China guanxi and, 166–167, 173
contracts and, 181–185
icebreaker exercises, 172–174
-oriented and trusting scale, 21–23, 21 (fig.), 23 (fig.), 40
outside of business, 106
peach v. coconut models of, 174–178
scheduling scale and, 225–228, 227 (fig.)
Repetition, 51
Reports, written, 58
Repsol, 182–183

Respect
authority and, 139–140
showing, 139–142
Roman Empire, 127–128

Romance languages
cluster of, 40–41, 41 (fig.)
high-context communication and, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
Root-binding. See Nemawashi
Rules, 56–57
Russia, 94–95
business culture of, 16–18, 17 (fig.)
hierarchical culture of, 16–18, 17 (fig.), 117–118, 142
high-context communication, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
negative feedback and, 69–70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 74–78
on persuading scale, 96–97, 96 (fig.)
trusting scale and, 171–172, 171 (fig.), 178–179
The Russian Handbook, 74
Saint Gobain, 192
Sandemose, Aksel, 116–117
Saudi Arabia, 238
high-context communication and, 39–40, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.), 55–57
trusting scale and, 171 (fig.), 172, 191
Scandinavia, 138
legal system of, 98
on persuading scale, 95–97, 96 (fig.)

Scheduling
cultural bridge for, 249–251
framing strategy for, 237–239
France and, 22–23, 23 (fig.), 221–222
Germany and, 18–19, 19 (fig.), 20 (fig.), 22–23, 23 (fig.), 220, 226, 232–
233
India and, 22–23, 23 (fig.), 220
KPMG global teams on, 22–23, 23 (fig.)
South Americans and, 220, 221–224
style-switching approach to, 231–237
time and, 219–224
U.K. and, 22–23, 23 (fig.), 220
U.S. and, 220

Scheduling scale
in eight-scale model, 16, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
inefficiency within, 239–241
relationships and, 225–228, 227 (fig.)

School system
Anglo-Saxon, 94
of France, 79, 99, 200
of Latin America, 94
of Latin Europeans, 94
Self-deprecation, 52
Shahid, Suleman, 201
Shen, Elisabeth, 48, 169
Shotoku, Prince, 199

Singapore
high-context communication and, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
negative feedback and, 69 (fig.), 70, 72 (fig.)

South Americans
negative feedback and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
scheduling and, 220, 221–224
Spain, 102
communication in, 31
e-mail and, 47
high-context communication and, 39, 39 (fig.), 47
idioms of, 39
leading scale and, 125 (fig.), 126
negative feedback and, 69 (fig.), 70, 72 (fig.), 78
recaps and, 46–47
trusting scale and, 21–23, 21 (fig.), 23 (fig.), 173
Stereotypes, 13

Summarization
explicit, 57
oral, 56–57
Sweden, 145–146, 228, 230
deciding scale and, 150 (fig.), 151–153
egalitarian, 128
leading scale and, 125 (fig.), 126
Swerts, Marc, 201
Switzerland, 165–167, 170
Synthesis, 99–100
Taoism, 110–111
Tarasov, Mr., 94–95
Team, 249–250
leaders, 107
protocols, 139
scheduling and global, 22–23, 23 (fig.)
Thailand, 199
negative feedback and, 70, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 85
trust in, 188

Thinking
business, 111–112
patterns, 108–109
specific, 110–112

Time
flexible-, 220, 224–225, 231
linear-, 220, 224, 230
scheduling and, 219–224
See also Scheduling; Scheduling scale
Titles, 57, 141
Toledo, Ohio, 32–33
Toshiba Westinghouse, 112

Translation
art of, 65–71, 67 (fig.), 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.)
Guide, Anglo-Dutch, 67, 67 (fig.)
Trompenaars, Fons, 175
Trott, John, 173

Trust
affective, 167–170
Americans on, 169–170, 175
in Brazil, 163–165, 170, 175–176
breaking, 136
building, 53, 105–106
building strategies, 178–181
in China, 165–167, 169–170, 188–189
cognitive, 167–170
sharing meals, drinks and, 164–165, 167, 185–189
in Switzerland, 165–167, 170
in Thailand, 188

Trusting scale
Australia and, 171 (fig.), 172
Brazil and, 171–172, 171 (fig.)
BRIC countries, 171–174, 171 (fig.)
China and, 171–174, 171 (fig.)
in eight-scale model, 16, 17 (fig.), 244–249, 246 (fig.)
India and, 171–172, 171 (fig.), 180
Indonesia and, 171 (fig.), 172
relationship-based and, 170–174, 171 (fig.), 180–181, 183–185
relationship-oriented and, 21–23, 21 (fig.), 23 (fig.), 40
Russia and, 171–172, 171 (fig.), 178–179
Saudi Arabia and, 171 (fig.), 172, 191
Spain and, 21–23, 21 (fig.), 23 (fig.), 173
task-based and, 170–174, 171 (fig.), 178, 181–183
task-oriented and, 21–23, 21 (fig.), 23 (fig.)
U.K. and, 171 (fig.), 172
U.S. and, 171 (fig.), 172
Turroturro, Cosimo, 23–24
U.K. See United Kingdom
Understatement, 65–66
United Kingdom (U.K.)
evaluating scale and, 20–21, 21 (fig.)
humor in, 44–46
legal system of, 98
low-context communication and, 34, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
negative feedback and, 69, 69 (fig.), 72 (fig.), 76
on persuading scale, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
recaps and, 46–47
scheduling and, 22–23, 23 (fig.), 220
trusting scale and, 171 (fig.), 172
usage of downgraders in, 67–69, 67 (fig.)
See also Anglo-Dutch Translation Guide
United States (U.S.), 138, 217
business culture of, 7–10
communication in, 31–32
decision-making in, 144–148, 150–153, 150 (fig.)
feedback in, 8–10
legal system of, 98
low-context communication and, 34, 39–41, 39 (fig.), 41 (fig.)
on persuading scale, 95–97, 96 (fig.)
scheduling and, 220
shared history of, 40–41, 41 (fig.)
trusting scale and, 171 (fig.), 172
University of Tilberg (Netherlands), 201
Upgraders, 65–66
U.S. See United States
Valeo, 245

Verification
levels of, 56–57
through open-ended questions, 51
Vikings, 128
Words, 206, 220
of downgraders, 65–66
English, 37
French, 37
Hindi, 37
of Japan, 37
multiple interpretation of, 37
multiple meanings of, 37–38
of upgraders, 65–66
World Bank, 233–235
World Medication Association, 70
Wu lun structure, 130
Yin and yang (dark and light), 111
Zimbabwe, 31

PHOTO BY KIM DURDANT-HOLLAMBY, KDH CREATIVE
Erin Meyer is a professor at INSEAD, one of the world’s
leading international business schools. Her work focuses on
how the world’s most successful global leaders navigate the
complexities  of  cultural  differences  in  a  multicultural
environment. Living and working in Africa, Europe, and the
United  States  prompted  Meyer’s  study  of  the
communication patterns and business systems of different
parts  of  the  world.  Her  work  has  appeared  in Harvard
Business  Review,  the New  York  Times,  and  on  CNN.  In
2015 Erin was selected by the Thinkers50 On the Radar list
as one of the world’s up-and-coming business thinkers.

PublicAffairs  is  a  publishing  house  founded  in  1997.  It  is  a  tribute  to  the
standards, values, and flair of three persons who have served as mentors to
countless reporters, writers, editors, and book people of all kinds, including me.
I. F STONE, proprietor of I. F. Stone’s Weekly, combined a commitment to the
First Amendment with entrepreneurial zeal and reporting skill and became one
of the great independent journalists in American history. At the age of eighty,
Izzy published The Trial of Socrates, which was a national bestseller. He wrote
the book after he taught himself ancient Greek.
BENJAMIN C. BRADLEE was for nearly thirty years the charismatic editorial leader
of The Washington Post. It was Ben who gave the Post the range and courage to
pursue such historic issues as Watergate. He supported his reporters with a
tenacity that made them fearless and it is no accident that so many became
authors of influential, best-selling books.
ROBERT L. BERNSTEIN, the chief executive of Random House for more than a
quarter century, guided one of the nation’s premier publishing houses. Bob was
personally responsible for many books of political dissent and argument that
challenged tyranny around the globe. He is also the founder and longtime chair
of Human Rights Watch, one of the most respected human rights organizations
in the world.
• • •
For fifty years, the banner of Public Affairs Press was carried by its owner
Morris B. Schnapper, who published Gandhi, Nasser, Toynbee, Truman, and
about  1,500  other  authors.  In  1983,  Schnapper  was  described  by The
Washington Post as “a redoubtable gadfly.” His legacy will endure in the books
to come.
Peter Osnos, Founder and Editor-at-Large