



USA               $25.95               
CANADA  $27.95  
•   Why  do  our  headaches  persist  after  taking  a  one-cent  
aspirin  but  disappear  when we take a 50-cent  aspirin?  
•   Why does recalling the Ten Commandments  reduce  our  
tendency  to  lie,  even  when  we  couldn't  possibly  be  
caught? 
•   Why  do  we  splurge  on a lavish  meal  but  cut  coupons  
to  save  25  cents on  a can of  soup?  
•   Why do we go back for  second helpings at the  unlimited  
buffet,  even when our  stomachs  are  already  full?  
•   And how  did  we  ever  start  spending  $4.15   on a cup  of  
coffee  when, just  a few  years ago, we  used to  pay  less  
than  a  dollar?  
hen it comes to making decisions in our lives, we 
think  we're  in control. We think  we're  making  
smart,  rational  choices. But are  we?  
In   a  series  of  illuminating,  often  surprising  experi­
ments, MIT behavioral economist Dan Ariely refutes  the  
common  assumption  that  we  behave  in   fundamentally   
rational ways. Blending everyday experience with  ground­
breaking  research,  Ariely  explains  how  expectations,  
emotions,  social norms,  and  other  invisible, seemingly 
illogical  forces skew our  reasoning abilities. 
Not  only  do  we make  astonishingly  simple  mistakes  
every day, but  we make the same  types   of mistakes, Ariely 
discovers.  We consistently  overpay,  underestimate,  and  
procrastinate. We fail to understand the profound   effects   
of  our emotions on what  we want,  and  we overvalue  what  
we already own. Yet these misguided behaviors are neither 
random  nor  senseless. They're  systematic  and  predict­
able—making  us  predictably       irrational.       
From drinking  coffee  to losing weight, from  buying  a  
car   to choosing  a romantic partner, Ariely explains  how  
to break through these systematic patterns  of thought  to  
make better decisions. Predictably      Irrational     will change 
the  way  we interact  with  the world—one  small decision 
at  a time. 
0208 

DAN    ARIELY  is  the  Alfred  P.  Sloan  Professor  of  
Behavioral  Economics  at MIT, where  he  holds  a  joint  
appointment  between MIT's  Media Laboratory  and  the  
Sloan School of Management. He is also a researcher at the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and  a visiting  professor  
at Duke  University. Ariely wrote  this book while he  was  
a  fellow  at  the  Institute  for  Advance  Study  at  Princeton.  
His work  has been featured  in leading scholarly journals 
and  a variety of popular  media outlets, including the   New   
York    Times,     the   Wall    Street    Journal,      the        Washington        
Post,  the  Boston     Globe,    Scientific    American,     and      Science.      
Ariely has appeared  on CNN  and National  Public Radio. 
He  divides  his  time  between  Durham,  North  Carolina,  
Cambridge, Massachusetts, and  the  rest of the  world.  
www.predictablyirrational.com 
AUTHOR     PHOTOGRAPH      COURTESY    OF THE  AUTHOR  
JACKET     DESIGN     BY  CHRISTINE    VAN  BREE  
Visit www.AuthorTracker.com  for  exclusive  
information  on your  favorite  HarperCollins  authors.  
HARPER 
An   Imprint     ofWzr^erQoWxnsPublishers     
www.harpercollins.com 

Predictably     Irrational—it's      not  what  you  think.  
"A  marvelous book that  is both  thought-provoking  and  highly entertaining,  ranging  from  
the power of placebos to the  pleasures of Pepsi. Ariely unmasks  the  subtle but  powerful  
tricks  that  our  minds  play  on  us,  and  shows  us  how  we can  prevent  being  fooled."  
—Jerome  Groopman,  Recanati Chair of Medicine, Harvard  Medical  School,  
and  New    York   Times   bestselling author  of  How   Doctors       Think       
"Dan  Ariely  is  a  genius  at  understanding  human  behavior:  no  economist  does  a  better  
job  of uncovering  and  explaining  the  hidden  reasons  for  the  weird  ways  we  act,  in  the  
marketplace and  out.  Predictably       Irrational      will reshape  the way  you  see the world,  and  
yourself,  for  good."  —James Surowiecki, author  of  The  Wisdom     of     Crowds     
"Filled  with  clever experiments,  engaging  ideas,  and  delightful  anecdotes.  Dan  Ariely  
is  a  wise  and  amusing  guide  to  the  foibles, errors,  and  bloopers  of  everyday  decision  
making." —Daniel Gilbert, Professor of Psychology, Harvard  University,  and  
New     York   Times    bestselling author  of  Stumbling    on     Happiness     
"This  is going to  be the  most  influential,  talked-about  book  in years.  It  is so  full  of  daz­
zling  insights—and  so engaging—that  once  I started  reading,  I couldn't  put  it  down."  
—Daniel  McFadden, 2000  Nobel  Laureate  in Economics, 
Morris  Cox Professor of Economics, University of California  at Berkeley 
"Predictably        Irrational      is wildly  original.  It shows  why—much  more  often  than  we  usu­
ally  care to  admit—humans  make  foolish,  and  sometimes disastrous,  mistakes. Ariely 
not  only  gives  us  a  great  read;  he  also makes  us  much  wiser."  
—George  Akerlof, 2001 Nobel  Laureate  in Economics, 
Koshland  Professor of Economics,  University of California  at Berkeley 
"The  most  difficult  part of investing  is managing  your emotions. Dan  explains why  that  
is  so  challenging  for  all  of us,  and  how  recognizing  your  built-in  biases  can  help  you  
avoid common  mistakes."  
—Charles  Schwab, Chairman  and  CEO, The  Charles Schwab  Corporation  

predictably 
irrational 



predictably 
irrational 
The  Hidden    Forces    That     Shape     
Our     Decisions     
Dan  Ariely  
HARPER 
An  Imprint        ofHarperCoMinsPublishers        
www.harpercollins.com 

PREDICTABLY  IRRATIONAL.  Copyright  ©  2008  by Dan  Ariely.  All  
rights reserved. Printed in  the  United  States of America. No  part  of  this  
book  may  be  used or reproduced  in  any  manner whatsoever  without  
written  permission  except  in  the case of  brief quotations  embodied  in  
critical  articles and  reviews.  For information,  address HarperCollins 
Publishers,  10 East  53rd  Street, New  York, NY  10022.  
HarperCollins  books  may  be purchased for educational,  business,  or  
sales  promotional  use.  For information,  please  write: Special  Markets  
Department,  HarperCollins Publishers,  10 East  53rd  Street, New  York,  
NY   10022.   
Designed  by Renato Stanisic 
Library  of  Congress  Cataloging-in-Publication  Data  is  available  upon  
request. 
ISBN:  978-0-06-135323-9  
08     09     10     11     12    WBC/RRD     10     9     8     7     6     

To   my   mentors,     colleagues,       and        students—        
who    make     research        exciting        



Contents 
INTRODUCTION: 
How   an  Injury   Led  Me  to  Irrationality     and  to   the   
Research     Described        Here        
xi 
CHAPTER    I    
The  Truth about Relativity: 
Why Everything Is Relative—Even When It Shouldn't Be 
1 
CHAPTER    2    
The  Fallacy  of  Supply  and Demand: 
Why  the  Price   of   Pearls—and     Everything        Else—        
Is  Up  in  the   Air   
23 
CHAPTER    3    
The  Cost  of  Zero  Cost:  
Why We Often Pay Too Much When We Pay Nothing 
49 

contents 
CHAPTER    4    
The  Cost  of  Social Norms: 
Why   We  Are   Happy    to  Do   Things,    but   Not     When     
We  Are   Paid   to  Do     Them     
67 
CHAPTER    5    
The  Influence  of Arousal: 
Why   Hot   Is  Much   Hotter    Than   We    Realize    
89 
CHAPTER    6    
The  Problem  of  Procrastination  and  Self-Control:  
Why   We  Can't   Make    Ourselves     Do     
What   We  Want  to   Do   
109 
CHAPTER    7    
The  High  Price of Ownership: 
Why   We  Overvalue     What   We    Have    
127 
CHAPTER    8    
Keeping Doors Open: 
Why Options Distract Us from Our Main Objective 
139 
CHAPTER    9    
The  Effect  of Expectations: 
Why   the  Mind    Gets   What   It    Expects    
155 
viii 

contents 
ix 
CHAPTER    IO    
The  Power of Price: 
Why   a  SO-Cent   Aspirin    Can   Do   What   a   Penny   
Aspirin      Can't      
173 
CHAPTER    I  I  
The  Context  of  Our  Character, Part I: 
Why   We  Are   Dishonest,     and     What     
We  Can   Do  about    It    
195 
CHAPTER   12   
The  Context  of  Our  Character, Part II: 
Why   Dealing    with   Cash   Makes    Us  More      Honest      
217 
CHAPTER   13   
Beer  and  Free Lunches: 
What   Is  Behavioral     Economics,     and   Where     Are     
the   Free     Lunches?     
231 
Thanks      245      
List of Collaborators 249 
Notes 255 
Bibliography and Additional Readings 259 
Index 269 



Introduction 
How  an  Injury   Led  Me  to  Irrationality     and     
to  the  Research    Described      Here      
I
have been told  by many  people that  I have an  unusual  way  
of  looking at  the  world.  Over the  last 20 years or  so of my 
research career, it's enabled me to have a lot of fun  figuring  out  
what  really influences our decisions in daily life  (as opposed  to  
what  we think,  often  with  great confidence, influences them). 
Do  you know  why  we  so often  promise  ourselves to  diet,  
only  to  have  the  thought  vanish  when  the  dessert  cart  rolls  
by? 
Do  you know  why  we sometimes  find  ourselves excitedly 
buying things  we don't  really need? 
Do  you know  why  we still have  a headache  after  taking  a  
one-cent  aspirin,  but  why that  same headache vanishes  when  
the aspirin  costs 50 cents? 
Do  you  know  why  people  who  have  been  asked  to  recall  
the Ten Commandments  tend  to be more honest  (at least im­
mediately  afterward)  than  those who  haven't? Or  why  honor  
codes actually do  reduce dishonesty  in the workplace? 

introduction 
By  the  end  of this book, you'll know  the  answers  to  these  
and  many  other  questions  that  have  implications  for  your  
personal  life,  for your  business  life,  and  for the  way  you look 
at the world. Understanding  the answer  to the question  about  
aspirin, for example, has implications not only for your choice 
of  drugs,  but  for  one of the  biggest issues facing our society: 
the cost and  effectiveness of health  insurance.  Understanding  
the impact of the Ten Commandments  in curbing  dishonesty  
might  help  prevent  the  next  Enron-like  fraud.  And  under­
standing  the  dynamics  of  impulsive  eating  has  implications  
for  every  other  impulsive  decision  in  our   lives—including   
why  it's so hard  to  save money  for  a rainy  day.  
My  goal,  by  the  end  of  this  book,  is  to  help  you   funda­
mentally rethink  what  makes you  and  the people around  you  
tick.  I hope  to  lead  you  there  by  presenting  a  wide  range of 
scientific  experiments,  findings,  and  anecdotes  that  are  in  
many  cases quite  amusing.  Once you  see how  systematic cer­
tain  mistakes  are—how  we  repeat  them  again  and  again—I  
think  you  will begin to  learn  how  to  avoid some of them. 
But  before  I  tell  you  about  my  curious,  practical,  enter­
taining  (and  in some cases even delicious) research on  eating,  
shopping,  love,  money,  procrastination,  beer,  honesty,  and  
other  areas  of life,  I feel  it  is important  that  I tell  you  about  
the  origins  of  my  somewhat  unorthodox   worldview—and   
therefore  of  this  book.  Tragically,  my  introduction  to  this  
arena  started  with  an  accident  many  years  ago that  was  any­
thing  but  amusing.  
ON  WHAT  WOULD  otherwise have been a normal Friday  after­
noon  in  the  life  of  an  eighteen-year-old  Israeli,  everything  
changed  irreversibly  in  a  matter  of  a  few  seconds. An  explo-
xii 

introduction 
sion  of  a  large  magnesium  flare,  the  kind  used  to  illuminate  
battlefields  at  night,  left  70 percent  of  my  body  covered  with  
third-degree  burns.  
The  next three  years  found  me wrapped  in  bandages  in  a  
hospital  and  then  emerging  into  public  only  occasionally,  
dressed  in  a tight  synthetic suit  and  mask that  made  me look 
like  a crooked  version  of Spider-Man. Without  the  ability  to  
participate  in the  same daily activities as my friends  and  fam­
ily,  I  felt  partially  separated  from  society  and  as  a  conse­
quence  started  to  observe  the  very  activities that  were  once  
my  daily  routine  as  if  I  were  an  outsider.  As  if  I  had  come  
from  a different  culture  (or planet), I started  reflecting on  the  
goals  of  different  behaviors,  mine  and  those  of  others.  For  
example,  I  started  wondering  why  I  loved  one  girl  but  not  
another,  why  my  daily  routine  was  designed  to  be  comfort­
able for the physicians but  not  for me, why  I loved going rock 
climbing but not studying history, why  I cared so much  about  
what  other people thought  of me, and  mostly what  it is about 
life that  motivates people  and  causes us to behave  as we  do.  
During the years in the hospital following my accident, I had 
extensive  experience  with  different  types  of  pain  and  a  great  
deal of time between  treatments  and  operations to  reflect on it. 
Initially, my daily agony was largely played out  in the "bath,"  a  
procedure  in  which  I was  soaked  in  disinfectant  solution,  the  
bandages  were  removed,  and  the  dead  particles  of  skin  were  
scraped  off. When the  skin is intact, disinfectants  create a low-
level  sting,  and  in  general  the  bandages  come  off  easily. But 
when  there  is  little  or  no  skin—as  in  my  case  because of  my  
extensive  burns—the  disinfectant  stings  unbearably,  the  ban­
dages stick to the flesh, and removing them  (often tearing them) 
hurts like nothing  else I can describe. 
Early  on  in  the  burn  department  I  started  talking  to  the  
xiii 

introduction 
nurses  who  administered  my  daily  bath,  in  order  to  under­
stand  their  approach  to  my  treatment.  The  nurses  would  
routinely  grab  hold of a bandage  and  rip  it off as fast  as pos­
sible, creating  a relatively short  burst  of pain;  they  would  re­
peat  this  process  for  an  hour  or  so  until  they  had  removed  
every  one of the  bandages.  Once this  process was  over  I was 
covered  with  ointment  and  with  new  bandages,  in  order  to  
repeat  the process again  the next  day.  
The  nurses,  I quickly learned,  had  theorized  that  a vigor­
ous tug  at the  bandages, which  caused  a sharp  spike of pain, 
was preferable  (to the patient)  to  a  slow pulling of the  wrap­
pings, which might not lead to such  a severe spike of pain  but  
would  extend  the  treatment,  and  therefore  be  more  painful  
overall. The nurses  had  also concluded that  there was no  dif­
ference  between  two  possible methods:  starting  at  the  most  
painful  part  of the  body  and  working  their  way  to  the  least  
painful  part; or starting  at the least painful  part  and  advanc­
ing to the  most excruciating areas. 
As someone who  had  actually experienced the pain  of the 
bandage  removal process, I did  not  share their  beliefs (which 
had  never been scientifically tested). Moreover, their theories 
gave no  consideration  to  the  amount  of fear  that  the  patient  
felt  anticipating  the  treatment;  to  the  difficulties  of  dealing  
with  fluctuations of pain  over time; to the unpredictability of 
not  knowing  when  the  pain  will start  and  ease off; or  to  the  
benefits  of being comforted  with  the possibility that  the  pain  
would  be reduced  over time. But, given  my helpless position, 
I had  little influence over the  way  I was  treated.  
As soon  as  I was able to  leave the hospital  for  a prolonged 
period   (I  would  still  return  for  occasional  operations  and  
treatments  for  another  five  years),  I  began  studying  at  Tel  
Aviv University. During  my  first  semester, I took  a  class that 
xiv 

introduction 
profoundly  changed  my  outlook  on  research  and  largely  de­
termined  my  future.  This  was  a  class  on  the  physiology of 
the brain, taught  by professor Hanan  Frenk. In addition  to  the  
fascinating material Professor Frenk presented  about the work­
ings of the  brain,  what  struck  me  most  about  this  class  was  
his attitude  to questions and alternative theories. Many times, 
when  I  raised  my  hand  in  class  or  stopped  by  his  office  to  
suggest  a different  interpretation  of some  results  he  had  pre­
sented,  he  replied  that  my  theory  was  indeed  a  possibility  
(somewhat unlikely, but a possibility nevertheless)—and  would  
then  challenge me to propose  an  empirical test to  distinguish  
it from  the conventional  theory.  
Coming  up  with  such  tests was  not  easy, but  the  idea  that  
science is an empirical endeavor  in which  all the  participants,  
including  a  new  student  like  myself, could  come  up  with  al­
ternative  theories,  as  long  as  they  found  empirical  ways  to  
test these theories, opened  up  a new  world  to  me. On  one of 
my  visits to  Professor  Frenk's  office,  I proposed  a  theory  ex­
plaining  how  a  certain  stage  of  epilepsy  developed,  and  in­
cluded  an  idea  for  how  one might  test  it in  rats.  
Professor  Frenk  liked  the  idea,  and   for  the  next  three  
months  I operated  on  about  50 rats,  implanting  catheters  in  
their  spinal  cords  and  giving  them  different  substances  to  
create  and  reduce  their  epileptic  seizures.  One  of the  practi­
cal  problems  with  this  approach  was  that  the  movements of 
my  hands  were  very  limited,  because of  my  injury,  and  as  a  
consequence  it  was  very  difficult  for  me  to  operate  on  the  
rats.  Luckily for  me,  my  best  friend,  Ron  Weisberg  (an  avid  
vegetarian  and  animal  lover),  agreed  to come with  me to  the  
lab for several weekends  and  help me with  the  procedures—a  
true test of friendship  if ever there  was  one.  
In  the  end,  it  turned  out  that  my  theory  was  wrong,  but  
xv 

introduction 
this  did  not  diminish   my  enthusiasm.   I  was  able  to  learn  
something  about  my  theory,  after  all,  and  even  though  the  
theory  was  wrong,  it  was  good  to  know  this  with  high  cer­
tainty.  I always  had  many  questions  about  how  things  work  
and  how  people  behave,  and  my  new   understanding—that   
science provides  the tools and  opportunities  to examine  any­
thing  I  found  interesting—lured  me  into  the  study  of  how  
people  behave.  
With  these new tools, I focused  much  of my initial  efforts  
on  understanding  how  we  experience pain.  For obvious  rea­
sons  I  was  most  concerned  with  such  situations  as  the  bath  
treatment,  in which pain  must  be delivered to  a patient  over a 
long period  of time. Was it possible to  reduce  the  overall  ag­
ony of such pain? Over the next few years  I was  able to carry 
out  a  set  of  laboratory  experiments  on  myself,  my  friends,  
and  volunteers—using  physical  pain  induced  by  heat,  cold  
water, pressure, loud  sounds,  and  even the psychological pain 
of  losing  money  in  the  stock  market—to  probe  for  the  an­
swers. 
By the time  I had  finished,  I realized that  the nurses  in  the  
burn  unit  were  kind  and  generous  individuals   (well,  there  
was  one  exception)  with  a  lot  of experience  in  soaking  and  
removing bandages,  but  they  still didn't have the right  theory  
about  what  would  minimize  their  patients'  pain.  How  could  
they  be  so wrong,  I wondered,  considering  their  vast  experi­
ence?  Since  I knew  these nurses  personally,  I knew  that  their  
behavior  was  not  due  to  maliciousness, stupidity,  or neglect. 
Rather, they were most likely the victims of inherent  biases in 
their  perceptions  of their  patients'  pain—biases  that  appar­
ently were not  altered  even  by their  vast experience. 
For  these  reasons,  I  was  particularly  excited  when  I  re­
turned  to  the  burn  department  one  morning  and  presented  
xvi 

introduction 
my  results,  in  the  hope  of influencing  the  bandage  removal  
procedures  for  other  patients.  It turns  out,  I told  the  nurses  
and  physicians, that  people  feel  less pain  if treatments  (such  
as  removing  bandages  in  a bath)  are  carried  out  with  lower  
intensity   and   longer  duration   than   if  the   same   goal   is   
achieved  through  high  intensity  and  a  shorter  duration.  In  
other  words,  I  would  have  suffered  less  if they  had  pulled  
the  bandages  off  slowly  rather  than  with  their  quick-pull  
method. 
The  nurses  were  genuinely  surprised  by  my conclusions, 
but  I was  equally  surprised  by what  Etty, my  favorite  nurse,  
had  to  say. She admitted  that  their  understanding  had  been  
lacking  and  that  they  should  change  their  methods.  But  she  
also pointed  out  that  a discussion of the pain  inflicted  in  the  
bath  treatment  should  also take into account the psychologi­
cal  pain   that   the  nurses  experienced  when   their   patients   
screamed  in  agony.  Pulling  the  bandages  quickly  might  be  
more  understandable,   she  explained,  if  it  were  indeed  the  
nurses'  way of shortening  their  own  torment  (and their  faces  
often  did  reveal that  they were suffering). In the end,  though,  
we  all  agreed  that  the  procedures  should  be  changed,  and  
indeed, some of the  nurses  followed  my recommendations. 
My  recommendations  never changed  the  bandage  removal  
process  on  a  greater  scale  (as far  as  I know), but  the  episode  
left  a special impression on me. If the nurses, with  all their ex­
perience,  misunderstood  what  constituted  reality  for  the  pa­
tients they cared so much about, perhaps other people similarly 
misunderstand  the  consequences of  their  behaviors  and,  for  
that reason, repeatedly make the wrong  decisions. I decided  to  
expand  my scope of research, from  pain  to the examination of 
cases  in  which  individuals  make  repeated  mistakes—without  
being able to learn much from  their experiences. 
xvii 

introduction 
THIS  JOURNEY   INTO  the  many  ways  in  which  we  are  all  ir­
rational,  then,  is  what  this  book  is  about.  The  discipline  
that  allows  me  to  play  with  this  subject  matter  is  called  
behavioral        economics,       or  judgment  and  decision  making  
(JDM). 
Behavioral  economics  is  a  relatively  new  field,  one  that  
draws  on  aspects  of both  psychology  and  economics. It  has  
led  me  to  study  everything  from  our  reluctance  to  save  for  
retirement  to  our  inability  to  think  clearly  during  sexual  
arousal.  It's not  just the  behavior  that  I have  tried  to  under­
stand, though,  but also the decision-making processes behind 
such  behavior—yours,  mine,  and  everybody  else's.  Before  
I  go  on,  let  me  try  to  explain,  briefly, what  behavioral  eco­
nomics  is  all  about  and  how  it  is  different  from   standard   
economics. Let me start  out  with  a bit of Shakespeare: 
What   a piece   of  work   is a man!  how   noble   in     reason!     
how   infinite   in  faculty!    in  form   and  moving    how    
express    and  admirable!     in  action   how  like  an    angel!    
in  apprehension      how   like   a god!  The  beauty   of  the  
world,    the  paragon     of  animals.    —from  Act II, 
scene 2, of    Hamlet    
The  predominant   view  of  human  nature,  largely  shared  
by  economists, policy  makers,  nonprofessionals,  and  every­
day  Joes,  is  the  one  reflected  in  this  quotation.  Of  course,  
this view is largely correct. Our  minds  and  bodies are capable 
of  amazing  acts. We can  see  a  ball  thrown  from  a  distance,  
instantly  calculate  its  trajectory  and  impact,  and  then  move  
our  body  and  hands  in  order  to  catch  it.  We can  learn  new  
languages  with  ease, particularly  as  young  children.  We can 
master  chess. We  can  recognize  thousands  of  faces  without  
xviii 

introduction 
confusing  them.  We  can  produce  music,  literature,  technol­
ogy,  and  art—and  the  list goes on  and  on.  
Shakespeare  is  not  alone  in  his  appreciation  for  the  hu­
man  mind.  In fact,  we all think  of ourselves along the lines of 
Shakespeare's  depiction   (although   we  do  realize  that   our   
neighbors,  spouses,  and  bosses  do  not  always  live  up  to  this  
standard).  Within  the  domain  of science,  these  assumptions  
about  our  ability  for  perfect  reasoning  have  found  their  way  
into economics. In economics, this  very  basic idea, called ra­
tionality^   provides the foundation  for economic theories, pre­
dictions, and  recommendations.  
From  this perspective, and  to  the  extent that  we  all believe 
in human  rationality, we are  all economists. I don't  mean  that  
each  of  us  can  intuitively  develop  complex  game-theoretical  
models  or  understand  the  generalized  axiom of revealed  pref­
erence  (GARP);  rather,  I mean  that  we  hold  the  basic beliefs 
about human  nature  on which economics is built. In this book, 
when  I  mention  the  rational    economic  model,  I  refer  to  the  
basic  assumption  that  most  economists  and  many  of  us  hold  
about  human  nature—the  simple and  compelling idea that  we  
are capable of making the right  decisions for ourselves. 
Although  a  feeling  of  awe  at  the  capability  of humans  is  
clearly  justified,  there  is  a  large  difference  between  a  deep  
sense  of  admiration  and  the  assumption  that  our  reasoning  
abilities are perfect. In fact, this book  is about  human     irratio­
nality—about     our  distance  from  perfection.  I  believe  that  
recognizing where  we  depart  from  the  ideal  is  an  important  
part  of the  quest  to  truly  understand  ourselves, and  one  that  
promises  many  practical  benefits.  Understanding  irrational­
ity  is important  for  our  everyday  actions  and  decisions,  and  
for  understanding  how  we  design  our  environment  and  the  
choices it presents  to  us.  
xix 

introduction 
My  further  observation  is that  we  are  not  only  irrational,  
but   predictably       irrational—that       our  irrationality   happens   
the  same  way,  again  and  again.  Whether  we  are  acting  as  
consumers, businesspeople, or policy makers,  understanding  
how  we  are  predictably  irrational  provides  a  starting  point  
for  improving  our  decision making  and  changing the  way  we  
live for  the  better.  
This  leads  me  to  the  real  "rub"   (as  Shakespeare  might  
have  called  it)  between  conventional  economics and  behav­
ioral  economics. In  conventional economics, the  assumption  
that  we are all rational  implies that,  in everyday  life,  we com­
pute  the  value  of all the  options  we  face  and  then  follow  the  
best  possible path of action. What  if we make  a mistake  and  
do  something  irrational?  Here,  too,  traditional  economics  
has  an  answer:  "market  forces"  will  sweep  down  on  us  and  
swiftly  set us back on  the path of righteousness  and  rational­
ity. On  the  basis of these assumptions,  in  fact,  generations of 
economists  since Adam  Smith have  been  able to  develop  far-
reaching  conclusions  about  everything  from  taxation   and   
health-care policies to the pricing of goods  and services. 
But,  as you  will  see in  this book, we are really far  less ra­
tional  than  standard  economic  theory  assumes.  Moreover,  
these  irrational  behaviors  of  ours  are  neither  random   nor   
senseless.  They  are  systematic,  and  since  we  repeat   them   
again  and  again,  predictable.  So, wouldn't  it  make  sense  to  
modify   standard   economics,  to  move  it  away  from   naive   
psychology  (which  often  fails the  tests of reason,  introspec­
tion,  and—most   important—empirical   scrutiny)?  This  is  
exactly  what  the  emerging  field  of  behavioral  economics,  
and  this  book  as  a  small part  of that  enterprise,  is trying  to  
accomplish. 
xx 

introduction 
As  YOU  WILL  see in  the  pages  ahead,  each of the  chapters  in  
this book  is based on  a few experiments I carried out  over the 
years  with  some terrific  colleagues  (at the  end  of the  book, I 
have  included  short  biographies  of  my  amazing  collabora­
tors) . Why experiments ? Life  is complex, with  multiple forces 
simultaneously  exerting their  influences on  us, and  this com­
plexity  makes  it  difficult  to  figure  out  exactly  how  each of 
these forces shapes our  behavior. For social scientists, experi­
ments are like microscopes or strobe lights. They help us slow 
human  behavior  to  a  frame-by-frame   narration   of  events,  
isolate  individual  forces,  and  examine  those  forces  carefully  
and  in  more  detail.  They  let  us  test  directly  and  unambigu­
ously what  makes  us tick. 
There  is  one  other  point  I  want  to  emphasize  about  ex­
periments.  If  the  lessons  learned   in  any  experiment   were   
limited  to  the  exact  environment  of  the  experiment,  their  
value  would  be  limited.  Instead,  I  would  like  you  to  think  
about  experiments  as  an  illustration  of  a  general  principle,  
providing   insight  into  how  we  think   and   how   we  make  
decisions—not  only  in  the  context  of  a  particular  experi­
ment  but,  by extrapolation,  in  many  contexts of  life.  
In each chapter,  then,  I have taken  a  step  in  extrapolating  
the  findings  from  the experiments to other contexts,  attempt­
ing  to  describe  some  of  their  possible  implications  for  life,  
business,  and  public  policy. The  implications  I  have  drawn  
are, of course, just  a partial  list.  
To get real value from  this, and  from  social science in  gen­
eral,  it  is  important  that  you,  the  reader,  spend  some  time  
thinking  about  how  the principles of human  behavior  identi­
fied  in  the  experiments  apply  to  your  life.  My  suggestion  to  
you  is  to  pause   at  the  end  of  each  chapter   and   consider   
xxi 

introduction 
whether  the  principles  revealed  in  the  experiments  might  
make  your  life  better  or  worse,  and  more  importantly  what  
you  could  do  differently,  given  your  new  understanding of 
human nature.  This is where the real adventure  lies.  
And  now  for the journey. 
xxii 

predictably 
irrational 



CHAPTER       1       
The  Truth  about  Relativity  
Why  Everything    Is      Relative—Even      
When  It  Shouldn't    Be    
ne  day  while  browsing  the  World  Wide  Web  (obviously  
for  work—not  just  wasting  time), I stumbled  on  the  fol­
lowing  ad,  on  the  Web  site of a magazine,  the      Economist.      
Economist.com 
SUBSCRIPTIONS 
OPINION 
WORLD 
BUSINESS 
FINANCE  &  ECONOMICS  
SCIENCE  &  TECHNOLOGY  
PEOPLE 
BOOKS  &  ARTS  
MARKETS  &  DATA  
DIVERSIONS 
Welcome  to  
The  Economist  Subscription  Centre  
Pick the  type  of subscription  you  want  to  buy  
or renew. 
•   Economist.com  subscription  -  US $59.00 
One-year subscription to Economist.com. 
Includes online  access to  all  articles  from  
The  Economist since 1997. 
•   Print subscription  -  US $125.00 
One-year  subscription  to  the  print  edition  
of  The Economist. 
•  Print  & web  subscription  -  US $125.00 
One-year  subscription to  the  print  edition  
of  The Economist and online  access to  all  
articles from  The Economist  since 1997. 

predictably  irrational  
I read these offers one at a time. The first offer—the Inter­
net  subscription  for  $59—seemed reasonable.  The  second  
option—the  $125 print  subscription—seemed  a  bit  expen­
sive, but  still reasonable. 
But  then  I  read  the  third  option:  a  print  and  Internet  sub­
scription for $125.1  read  it twice before my eye ran  back to the 
previous  options.  Who  would  want  to  buy  the  print  option  
alone,  I  wondered,  when  both  the  Internet  and  the  print  sub­
scriptions were  offered  for the  same price? Now, the  print-only  
option  may  have been  a typographical  error, but  I suspect  that  
the  clever people  at  the  Economist's     London  offices  (and  they  
are clever—and quite mischievous in a British sort of way)  were  
actually manipulating  me. I am pretty  certain that  they  wanted  
me  to skip the Internet-only option  (which they assumed  would  
be  my choice, since I was reading the advertisement on the  Web)  
and jump to the more expensive option: Internet and  print.  
But  how  could they  manipulate  me? I suspect  it's because 
the  Economist's      marketing  wizards  (and  I could just  picture  
them  in their school ties and  blazers) knew something impor­
tant  about  human  behavior: humans  rarely choose things  in  
absolute  terms.  We  don't  have  an  internal  value  meter  that  
tells  us how  much  things  are worth.  Rather, we focus on  the  
relative  advantage  of  one  thing  over  another,  and  estimate  
value accordingly. (For instance, we don't  know  how  much a 
six-cylinder car is worth,  but  we can assume it's more expen­
sive than  the four-cylinder model.) 
In the case of the Economist,     I may not have known whether 
the Internet-only subscription at $59 was a better deal than  the  
print-only  option  at  $125. But I certainly knew that  the  print-
and-Internet  option  for  $125 was  better  than  the  print-only  
option  at  $125.  In  fact,  you  could  reasonably  deduce  that  in  
the combination package, the Internet subscription is free! "It's 
2 

the  truth  about   relativity   
a  bloody steal—go for it, governor! " I could almost hear  them  
shout from  the riverbanks of the Thames. And  I have to  admit,  
if  I had  been inclined to subscribe I probably would  have taken 
the  package  deal  myself.  (Later,  when  I  tested  the  offer  on  a  
large  number  of participants,  the  vast  majority  preferred  the  
Internet-and-print  deal.)  
So  what  was  going  on  here?  Let  me  start  with  a  funda­
mental  observation: most people don't  know  what  they  want  
unless  they  see  it  in  context.  We  don't  know  what  kind  of  
racing  bike  we  want—until  we  see  a  champ  in  the  Tour  de  
France  ratcheting  the  gears  on  a particular  model.  We  don't  
know  what  kind  of speaker  system  we  like—until  we hear  a  
set  of speakers that  sounds  better  than  the  previous  one. We 
don't  even  know  what  we  want  to  do  with  our  lives—until  
we  find  a relative or  a friend  who  is doing  just what  we  think  
we  should  be  doing.  Everything  is  relative,  and  that's   the   
point.  Like  an  airplane  pilot  landing  in  the  dark,  we  want  
runway  lights  on  either  side  of  us,  guiding  us  to  the  place  
where  we can touch  down  our  wheels.  
In the case of the Economist,    the decision between the Internet-
only and  print-only  options would  take a bit of thinking. Think­
ing  is  difficult  and  sometimes  unpleasant.  So  the      Economist's      
marketers  offered  us  a  no-brainer:  relative to  the  print-only  op­
tion, the print-and-Internet  option looks clearly superior. 
The  geniuses at the Economist    aren't the only ones who  un­
derstand  the  importance  of relativity. Take  Sam, the television 
salesman. He  plays the  same  general  type  of trick  on  us  when  
he decides which televisions to put  together on  display:  
36-inch  Panasonic for  $690  
42-inch Toshiba for  $850  
50-inch  Philips for  $1,480  
3 

predictably  irrational  
Which  one  would  you  choose?  In  this  case,  Sam  knows  
that  customers  find  it difficult  to compute  the value of  differ­
ent  options.  (Who really knows  if the  Panasonic  at  $690  is a 
better  deal  than  the  Philips  at  $1,480?)  But Sam also  knows  
that  given  three  choices,  most  people  will  take  the  middle  
choice  (as in  landing  your  plane  between  the  runway  lights).  
So  guess  which  television  Sam  prices  as  the  middle  option?  
That's  right—the  one  he wants  to  sell!  
Of  course,  Sam  is  not  alone  in  his  cleverness. The   New   
York   Times   ran  a story  recently about  Gregg Rapp,  a  restau­
rant  consultant,  who  gets  paid  to  work  out  the  pricing  for  
menus.  He  knows,  for  instance,  how  lamb  sold  this  year  as  
opposed  to  last  year;  whether  lamb  did  better  paired  with  
squash  or  with  risotto;  and  whether  orders  decreased  when  
the price of the  main  course was hiked  from  $39 to  $41.  
One thing Rapp  has learned  is that  high-priced  entrées  on  
the  menu  boost  revenue  for  the  restaurant—even  if  no  one  
buys them. Why? Because even though  people generally won't 
buy  the  most  expensive dish  on  the  menu,  they will order  the  
second  most  expensive dish.  Thus,  by  creating  an  expensive  
dish,  a restaurateur  can  lure  customers  into  ordering  the  sec­
ond  most  expensive choice (which can  be cleverly engineered 
to  deliver  a higher  profit  margin).
1  
So    LET'S   RUN  through   the  Economist's      sleight  of  hand  in  
slow  motion.  
As you  recall, the  choices were: 
1.  Internet-only  subscription  for $59. 
2.  Print-only  subscription  for  $125.  
3.  Print-and-Internet  subscription  for  $125.  
4 

the   truth  about   relativity   
When  I gave these options  to  100 students  at MIT's  Sloan  
School of Management,  they  opted  as follows: 
1.  Internet-only  subscription  for $59—16  students  
2.  Print-only  subscription  for $125—zero  students  
3.  Print-and-Internet  subscription  for $125—84  students  
So   far  these  Sloan  MBAs  are  smart  cookies.  They  all  
saw  the  advantage  in  the  print-and-Internet   offer  over  the  
print-only  offer. But were  they  influenced  by the  mere  pres­
ence  of the  print-only  option  (which  I will  henceforth,  and  
for   good  reason,  call  the  "decoy"). In  other  words,  suppose  
that  I  removed  the  decoy  so  that  the  choices would  be  the  
ones  seen  in  the  figure  below:  
Economist.com 
SUBSCRIPTIONS 
OPINION 
WORLD 
BUSINESS 
FINANCE  &  ECONOMICS  
SCIENCE  &  TECHNOLOGY  
PEOPLE 
BOOKS  & ARTS 
MARKETS  &  DATA  
DIVERSIONS 
Welcome to 
The   Economist Subscription Centre 
Pick the type of subscription you want to buy 
or  renew.  
•   Economist.com subscription -  US  $59.00  
One-year  subscription to  Economist.com.  
Includes online access to  all articles from 
The  Economist  since 1997. 
•   Print  & web  subscription -  US  $125.00  
One-year  subscription to the  print edition 
of  The Economist  and online access to all 
articles from  The  Economist  since 1997. 
5 

predictably   irrational   
Would  the  students  respond  as  before  (16 for  the  Internet  
only  and  84 for  the  combination)?  
Certainly  they  would  react  the  same  way,  wouldn't  they?  
After  all, the  option  I took  out  was  one  that  no  one  selected,  
so  it should  make  no  difference. Right? 
Au    contraire!     This  time,  68  of  the  students  chose  the  
Internet-only  option  for  $59, up  from  16 before.  And  only 32 
chose  the  combination  subscription  for  $125, down  from  84  
before/
1
" 
SCIENCE &  TECHNOLOGY  
MARKETS S  DAT)  
SUBSCRIPTIONS 
Welcome  to  
The  Economist   Subscript!   
Pick  the type  of  subscription  
Dn  Centre  
you  want  to  buy  
•   Economist.com  subscription  -  US  $59.00  
One-year  subscription  to  Economist.com.  
Includes  online  access  to  all articles  from  
The   Economist    since  1997  
•   Print  subscription   -  US  $125.00  
One-year  subscription  to the  print  edition  
of  The     Economist.     
(0> 
•   Print  & web subscription   -  US  $125.00  
One-year  subscription  to the  print  edition  
of  The  Economist    and  online  access  to  all  
articles  from  The  Economist    since  1997.  
r.ntnomKuom 
OPINION 
•;:V.••' 
FINANCE I  ECONOMICS  
SCIENCE &  TECHNOLOGY  
BOOKS I  ARTS  
VAftKE-ISS.lV.T.1. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS 
Welcome  to  
The  Economist  Subscription   Centre   
Pick  the type  of  subscription  you want  to buy 
•   Economist.com  subscription   -  US  $59.00  
One-year  subscription  to  Economist.com.  
Includes  online  access  to  all  articles  from  
The  Economist    since  1997.  
•   Print  & web subscription   -  US  $125.00  
One-year  subscription  to the  print  edition  
of  The  Economist    and online  access  to all 
articles  from  The  Economist    since  1997.  
What  could  have  possibly  changed  their  minds?  Nothing  
rational,  I assure  you.  It  was  the  mere  presence  of the  decoy  
that  sent  84 of them  to  the  print-and-Internet   option  (and  16  
to  the  Internet-only  option).  And  the  absence  of  the  decoy  
had  them  choosing differently,  with  32 for   print-and-Internet   
and  68 for  Internet-only.  
This  is  not  only  irrational   but  predictably  irrational   as   
well. Why? I'm  glad  you  asked.  
As a convention  in this  book,  every time I mention  that conditions  are different  from  
each other, it is always a statistically  significant  difference.  I refer the interested reader 
to the end of this  book  for a list of the original  academic papers and additional  readings.  
6 

the  truth  about   relativity   
LET  ME  OFFER  you  this  visual  demonstration  of relativity. 
As you can see, the middle  circle can't seem to stay the  same  
size.  When  placed  among  the  larger  circles,  it  gets  smaller.  
When  placed  among  the  smaller  circles,  it  grows  bigger.  The  
middle  circle is the same size in both positions, of course, but  it  
appears  to change depending  on what  we place next to  it.  
This  might  be  a  mere  curiosity,  but  for  the  fact  that  it  
mirrors  the  way  the  mind  is wired:  we  are  always  looking  at  
the  things  around  us  in  relation  to  others.  We can't  help  it.  
This  holds  true  not  only  for  physical  things—toasters,  bicy­
cles, puppies,  restaurant  entrées, and  spouses—but  for expe­
riences  such  as  vacations  and  educational  options,  and  for  
ephemeral  things  as  well: emotions,  attitudes,  and  points of 
view. 
We  always  compare  jobs  with  jobs,  vacations  with  vaca­
tions,  lovers  with  lovers,  and  wines  with  wines.  All  this  
relativity   reminds   me  of  a  line  from   the   film        Crocodile        
Dundee,    when  a  street  hoodlum  pulls  a  switchblade  against  
our  hero,  Paul  Hogan.  "You call  that  a  knife?"  says  Hogan  
7 

predictably  irrational  
incredulously,  withdrawing  a  bowie  blade  from  the  back of 
his boot. "Now  this"    he  says with  a  sly grin,  "is a knife." 
RELATIVITY  IS  (RELATIVELY)  easy to understand.  But there's 
one  aspect of relativity that  consistently trips  us  up.  It's this: 
we  not  only  tend  to  compare  things  with  one  another  but  
also   tend   to   focus   on   comparing   things   that   are  easily  
comparable—and   avoid  comparing  things  that  cannot  be  
compared easily. 
That  may  be  a  confusing  thought,  so  let  me  give  you  an  
example. Suppose you're  shopping  for  a house  in  a new  town.  
Your  real estate agent  guides  you to three  houses, all of which 
interest you. One of them  is a contemporary, and two are colo­
nials. All three  cost about  the  same; they  are  all equally  desir­
able;  and  the  only  difference  is that  one  of the  colonials  (the  
"decoy")  needs  a new  roof  and  the  owner  has  knocked  a  few  
thousand  dollars off the price to cover the  additional  expense.  
So which  one will you choose? 
The  chances  are  good  that  you  will  not  choose  the  con­
temporary  and  you  will  not  choose  the  colonial  that  needs  
the  new  roof,  but  you  will  choose the  other  colonial. Why? 
Here's  the  rationale  (which  is  actually  quite  irrational). We 
like  to  make  decisions  based  on  comparisons.  In  the  case of 
the  three  houses,  we  don't  know  much  about  the  contempo­
rary   (we  don't  have  another  house  to  compare  it  with),  so  
that  house  goes on  the  sidelines. But we do know  that  one of 
the  colonials is  better  than  the  other  one. That  is, the  colo­
nial  with  the  good  roof  is  better  than  the  one  with  the  bad  
roof. Therefore, we will reason  that  it is better overall and  go  
for  the  colonial with  the  good  roof,  spurning  the  contempo­
rary  and  the colonial that  needs  a new  roof.  
8 

the  truth  about   relativity   
A 
-A 
B 
Attribute 2 
In  the  left  side  of  this  illustration  we  see  two  options,  
each  of which  is  better  on  a  different  attribute.  Option  (A)  
is better  on  attribute  1—let's  say  quality.  Option  (B) is  bet­
ter on  attribute  2—let's say beauty.  Obviously these  are  two  
very  different  options  and  the  choice between  them  is  not  
simple.  Now  consider  what  happens  if we  add  another  op­
tion, called (-A)  (see the  right  side of the  illustration). This 
option  is  clearly  worse  than  option  (A), but  it  is  also  very  
similar  to  it,  making  the  comparison  between  them  easy,  
and  suggesting that  (A) is not  only better than   (—A) but  also  
better  than (B). 
In essence, introducing  (-A), the decoy, creates a simple rela­
tive comparison with  (A), and hence makes  (A) look better, not 
just  relative to  (-A), but  overall  as well. As  a consequence, the 
inclusion of (-A) in the set, even if no one ever selects it, makes 
people more likely to make  (A) their  final  choice.  
Does this selection process sound  familiar? Remember the 
pitch  put  together  by  the  Economist}      The  marketers  there  
knew  that  we  didn't  know  whether  we  wanted  an  Internet  
subscription  or  a print  subscription.  But they  figured  that, of 
9 
To  better  understand   how  relativity  works,  consider  the  
following  illustration:  

predictably   irrational   
the  three  options,  the  print-and-Internet  combination  would  
be the  offer  we would  take.  
Here's  another  example of the  decoy  effect.  Suppose  you  
are planning  a honeymoon  in Europe. You've already  decided  
to  go to  one of the  major  romantic  cities and  have  narrowed  
your  choices  to  Rome  and  Paris,  your  two  favorites.  The  
travel  agent  presents  you with  the vacation packages for each 
city, which  includes airfare, hotel accommodations, sightsee­
ing tours,  and  a  free  breakfast  every  morning.  Which  would  
you select? 
For  most  people,  the  decision  between  a  week  in  Rome  
and  a week  in Paris is not  effortless. Rome has the Coliseum; 
Paris,  the  Louvre. Both have  a  romantic  ambience,  fabulous  
food,  and  fashionable shopping.  It's not  an  easy call. But sup­
pose  you  were  offered  a third  option:  Rome without  the  free  
breakfast,  called -Rome or the decoy. 
If  you  were  to  consider  these  three  options  (Paris, Rome, 
-Rome),   you   would   immediately   recognize  that   whereas   
Rome  with  the  free  breakfast  is  about  as  appealing  as  Paris  
with  the  free  breakfast,  the  inferior  option,  which  is Rome 
without  the  free  breakfast,  is  a  step  down.  The  comparison  
between  the  clearly  inferior  option  (-Rome)  makes  Rome  
with  the  free  breakfast   seem  even  better.  In  fact,  -Rome  
makes  Rome  with  the  free  breakfast  look  so  good  that  you  
judge  it  to  be  even  better  than  the  diffkult-to-compare   op­
tion, Paris with  the  free  breakfast.  
ONCE  YOU  SEE the  decoy  effect  in  action, you  realize that  it is 
the secret agent in more decisions than we could imagine. It even 
helps us decide whom to date—and, ultimately, whom to marry. 
Let  me describe an experiment that explored just this subject. 
10 

trie  truth  about  relativity  
As students  hurried  around MIT one cold weekday, I asked 
some of them  whether  they  would  allow  me to take  their pic­
tures  for  a  study.  In  some  cases, I got  disapproving  looks. A 
few  students  walked  away.  But  most  of them  were  happy  to  
participate,  and  before  long,  the  card  in  my  digital  camera  
was  filled  with  images  of  smiling  students.  I  returned  to  my  
office  and  printed  60 of them—30 of women  and 30 of men. 
The  following week I made  an  unusual request of 25 of my 
undergraduates.   I  asked  them  to  pair  the  30 photographs  of  
men and  the 30 of women  by physical attractiveness  (matching  
the  men  with  other  men,  and  the  women  with  other  women).  
That  is, I had  them  pair  the  Brad Pitts  and  the  George Cloo-
neys of MIT,  as well as the Woody Aliens and  the Danny De-
Vitos  (sorry,  Woody  and  Danny).  Out  of  these  30  pairs,  I  
selected  the  six  pairs—three   female  pairs   and   three   male   
pairs—that  my students  seemed to agree were most alike. 
Now,  like  Dr.  Frankenstein  himself,  I  set  about   giving   
these faces my special treatment.  Using Photoshop,  I  mutated  
the  pictures  just  a  bit,  creating  a  slightly  but  noticeably  less  
attractive version of each of them.  I found  that  just the  slight­
est  movement  of the  nose threw  off the  symmetry.  Using  an­
other  tool,  I  enlarged  one  eye, eliminated  some  of  the  hair,  
and  added traces of acne. 
No  flashes  of  lightning  illuminated  my  laboratory;  nor  
was  there  a  baying  of the  hounds  on  the  moor.  But this  was  
still  a good  day  for  science. By the  time  I was  through,  I  had  
the MIT equivalent  of George Clooney in  his prime  (A)  and  
the MIT  equivalent  of Brad Pitt  in  his prime  (B),  and  also  a  
George  Clooney  with   a  slightly  drooping   eye  and  thicker  
nose  (-A, the  decoy)  and  a  less symmetrical  version  of Brad 
Pitt  (-B, another  decoy). I followed  the  same  procedure  for  
the  less attractive  pairs.  I had  the MIT equivalent  of Woody 
11 

predictably   irrational   
Allen  with  his usual  lopsided  grin  (A) and  Woody Allen  with  
an  unnervingly  misplaced  eye  (—A), as well as Danny DeVito 
(B)  and  a slightly disfigured  version of Danny  DeVito  (-B).  
For  each of the  12 photographs,  in fact, I now  had  a  regu­
lar  version  as  well  as  an  inferior  (-)  decoy  version.  (See the 
illustration  for  an  example of the  two  conditions  used  in  the  
study.) 
It  was  now  time  for  the  main  part  of  the  experiment.  I  
took  all the  sets of pictures  and  made  my way  over to the  stu­
dent  union.  Approaching  one  student  after  another,  I  asked  
each to participate. When the students  agreed, I handed  them  
a  sheet  with  three  pictures  (as in  the  illustration  here). Some 
of  them  had  the regular  picture  (A), the decoy of that  picture  
(—A), and  the  other  regular  picture  (B).  Others  had  the  regu­
lar picture  (B),  the  decoy of that  picture  (—B), and  the  other  
regular  picture (A). 
For  example, a  set might  include  a regular  Clooney  (A),  a  
decoy  Clooney  (—A), and  a  regular  Pitt  (B);  or  a  regular  Pitt  
(B),  a  decoy  Pitt  (—B),  and  a  regular  Clooney  (A). After  se­
lecting  a sheet with  either male or female pictures,  according  
to  their  preferences,  I asked  the  students  to  circle the  people  
they would  pick to go on  a date  with, if they had  a choice. All 
this  took  quite  a  while,  and  when  I was  done,  I had  distrib­
uted 600 sheets. 
What was  my motive in all this? Simply to determine if the 
existence of the  distorted  picture  (-A  or -B)  would  push  my  
participants  to choose the  similar  but  undistorted  picture.  In  
other  words,  would  a  slightly  less attractive George Clooney 
(-A) push the participants  to choose the perfect George Cloo­
ney over the perfect Brad Pitt? 
There  were  no  pictures  of Brad Pitt or  George Clooney in 
my experiment,  of course. Pictures  (A) and  (B) showed  ordi-
12 

the  truth  about   relativity   

predictably  irrational  
nary  students.  But  do  you  remember  how  the  existence of  a  
colonial-style  house  needing  a  new  roof  might  push  you  to  
choose a perfect colonial over a contemporary  house—simply  
because the  decoy colonial would  give you  something  against  
which  to  compare  the  regular  colonial? And  in  the     Econo­
mist's   ad, didn't the print-only  option  for  $125  push people  to  
take  the  print-and-Internet  option  for  $125?  Similarly, would 
the  existence of  a  less perfect  person  (-A  or -B)  push  people  
to  choose the  perfect  one  (A or B),  simply  because the  decoy  
option  served  as a point  of comparison? 
It  did.  Whenever  I handed  out  a  sheet  that  had  a  regular  
picture,  its  inferior  version,  and  another  regular  picture,  the  
participants   said  they  would   prefer  to  date  the   "regular"   
person—the  one who  was  similar, but  clearly superior,  to  the  
distorted  version—over  the  other,  undistorted  person  on  the  
sheet. This was  not  just  a  close call—it happened  75 percent 
of  the  time.  
To  explain  the  decoy  effect  further,  let  me  tell  you  some­
thing about bread-making machines. When Williams-Sonoma 
first  introduced  a  home  "bread  bakery"  machine  (for  $275),  
most consumers were not interested. What was  a home  bread-
making machine, anyway? Was it good or bad? Did one really 
need  home-baked  bread?  Why  not  just  buy  a  fancy   coffee-
maker  sitting  nearby  instead?  Flustered  by  poor  sales,  the  
manufacturer  of  the  bread  machine  brought  in  a  marketing  
research  firm,  which  suggested  a  fix: introduce  an  additional  
model  of  the  bread  maker,  one  that  was  not  only  larger  but  
priced about 50 percent  higher than  the initial machine. 
Now  sales began to rise  (along with  many  loaves of bread), 
though  it  was  not  the  large  bread  maker  that  was  being  sold.  
Why? Simply because consumers now had two models of bread 
makers to choose from.  Since one was clearly larger and  much  
14 

the  truth  about  relativity  
more  expensive  than  the  other,  people  didn't  have  to  make  
their  decision  in  a  vacuum.  They  could  say:  "Well,  I  don't  
know  much  about  bread  makers,  but  I do  know  that  if I were 
to  buy  one,  I'd  rather  have  the  smaller  one  for  less  money."  
And that's  when  bread  makers  began to fly off the shelves.
2  
OK  for  bread  makers.  But  let's  take  a  look  at  the  decoy  
effect   in  a  completely  different  situation.  What  if  you  are  
single,  and  hope  to  appeal  to  as  many  attractive  potential  
dating  partners  as possible at  an  upcoming  singles event? My 
advice would  be to bring  a friend  who has your basic physical 
characteristics  (similar coloring,  body  type,  facial  features),  
but  is slightly less attractive  (—you).  
Why?  Because  the  folks  you  want  to  attract  will  have  a  
hard  time evaluating you with no comparables around.  How­
ever,  if  you  are  compared  with  a  "-you,"  the  decoy  friend  
will  do  a lot to make  you look better, not  just  in  comparison  
with  the  decoy  but  also  in  general,  and  in  comparison  with  
all  the  other  people  around.  It  may  sound  irrational  (and  I  
can't  guarantee  this),  but  the  chances are  good  that  you  will  
get  some extra  attention.  Of course, don't  just  stop  at looks. 
If  great conversation will win  the  day, be sure to pick a  friend  
for  the  singles  event  who  can't  match  your  smooth  delivery  
and  rapier  wit.  By comparison, you'll sound  great.  
Now  that  you  know  this  secret, be  careful:  when  a  similar  
but better-looking friend of the same sex asks you to accompany 
him or her for  a night out, you might wonder  whether  you  have  
been invited along for your company or merely as a decoy. 
RELATIVITY   HELPS   US  make  decisions in  life.  But it can  also  
make  us  downright   miserable.  Why?  Because  jealousy  and  
envy spring  from  comparing our  lot in  life with  that  of others. 
15 

predictably   irrational   
It  was  for  good  reason,  after  all, that  the  Ten  Command­
ments  admonished,  "Neither  shall you desire your  neighbor's  
house  nor  field,  or  male  or  female  slave,  or  donkey  or  any­
thing  that  belongs to  your  neighbor."  This  might  just  be  the  
toughest  commandment  to  follow,  considering  that  by  our  
very nature  we are wired  to  compare.  
Modern  life  makes  this  weakness  even  more  pronounced.  
A few years ago, for instance, I met with  one of the top execu­
tives of one of the  big investment  companies. Over the  course  
of  our  conversation  he  mentioned  that  one  of  his  employees  
had  recently come to him  to complain  about  his salary. 
"How  long  have  you  been  with  the   firm?"  the  executive  
asked  the young  man.  
"Three   years.   I  came  straight   from   college,"   was   the   
answer. 
"And  when  you joined us, how  much  did  you expect to  be  
making  in three years?" 
"I  was  hoping  to  be making  about  a hundred  thousand."  
The  executive eyed him  curiously.  
"And  now  you  are  making  almost  three  hundred  thou­
sand,  so how  can you possibly complain?" he  asked.  
"Well,"  the young  man  stammered,  "it's just that  a couple 
of  the  guys  at  the  desks  next  to  me,  they're  not  any  better  
than  I am,  and  they  are making  three  hundred  ten."  
The  executive shook  his  head.  
An  ironic aspect of this  story  is that  in  1993,  federal  secu­
rities regulators  forced companies, for the  first time, to reveal 
details  about  the  pay  and  perks  of their  top  executives. The 
idea  was  that  once pay  was  in  the  open,  boards  would  be re­
luctant  to  give  executives  outrageous  salaries  and  benefits.  
This,  it was  hoped,  would  stop  the  rise  in  executive compen­
sation, which  neither  regulation,  legislation, nor  shareholder  
16 

the  truth  about  relativity  
pressure  had  been able to stop. And  indeed,  it needed  to  stop:  
in  1976 the  average  CEO  was  paid  36 times  as  much  as  the  
average  worker.  By  1993, the  average  CEO  was  paid  131  
times  as  much.  
But  guess  what  happened.  Once  salaries  became  public  
information,  the  media  regularly  ran  special  stories  ranking  
CEOs  by  pay.  Rather  than  suppressing  the  executive  perks,  
the publicity had  CEOs  in America comparing their pay  with  
that  of  everyone  else.  In  response,  executives'  salaries  sky­
rocketed.  The  trend  was  further  "helped"  by  compensation  
consulting  firms  (scathingly  dubbed  "Ratchet, Ratchet,  and  
Bingo"  by  the  investor  Warren  Buffett)   that  advised  their  
CEO  clients to  demand  outrageous  raises. The  result?  Now  
the  average CEO makes about 369 times as much  as the  aver­
age  worker—about  three  times  the  salary  before  executive  
compensation  went  public.  
Keeping that  in mind,  I had  a few questions  for the execu­
tive I met  with.  
"What  would  happen,"  I ventured,  "if the  information  in  
your  salary  database  became  known  throughout   the  com­
pany?" 
The  executive  looked  at  me  with  alarm.  "We  could  get  
over  a lot of things  here—insider  trading,  financial  scandals,  
and  the  like—but  if everyone  knew  everyone  else's salary,  it  
would  be  a  true  catastrophe.  All  but  the  highest-paid  indi­
vidual  would  feel  underpaid—and  I wouldn't  be  surprised if 
they  went  out  and  looked for  another job." 
Isn't  this  odd?  It  has  been  shown  repeatedly  that  the  link  
between  amount  of salary  and  happiness  is not  as  strong  as  
one  would  expect  it to  be  (in fact,  it  is rather  weak). Studies 
even  find  that  countries  with  the  "happiest"  people  are  not  
among  those  with  the  highest  personal  income. Yet we  keep  
17 

predictably  irrational  
pushing  toward  a higher  salary. Much of that  can  be  blamed  
on  sheer  envy.  As  H.  L.  Mencken,  the   twentieth-century   
journalist, satirist, social critic, cynic, and  freethinker  noted,  
a man's satisfaction with  his salary depends  on  (are you  ready  
for  this?) whether  he makes  more than  his wife's  sister's  hus­
band.  Why the  wife's  sister's husband?  Because (and  I have  a  
feeling  that  Mencken's  wife  kept  him  fully  informed  of  her  
sister's  husband's  salary)  this  is  a  comparison  that  is  salient  
and  readily available.* 
All  this  extravagance  in  CEOs'  pay  has  had  a  damaging  
effect  on  society. Instead  of  causing  shame,  every  new  out­
rage  in  compensation  encourages  other  CEOs  to   demand   
even  more.  "In  the  Web World,"  according  to  a  headline  in  
the  New   York   Times,   the  "Rich Now  Envy the  Superrich."  
In  another  news  story,  a  physician  explained  that  he  had  
graduated  from  Harvard  with  the  dream  of someday  receiv­
ing a Nobel Prize for cancer research. This was his goal. This 
was  his dream.  But a  few  years  later, he  realized  that  several  
of  his  colleagues  were  making  more  as  medical  investment  
advisers  at  Wall  Street  firms  than  he  was  making  in  medi­
cine.  He  had  previously  been  happy  with  his  income,  but  
hearing  of  his  friends'  yachts  and  vacation  homes,  he  sud­
denly   felt  very  poor.  So  he  took   another   route   with   his   
career—the  route  of Wall  Street.
3
  By the  time  he  arrived  at  
his  twentieth  class  reunion,  he  was  making  10 times  what  
most  of his  peers  were  making  in  medicine. You can  almost  
see  him,  standing  in  the  middle  of the  room  at  the  reunion,  
drink  in hand—a  large circle of influence with  smaller circles 
gathering  around  him.  He  had  not  won  the  Nobel  Prize,  but  
*Now  that you  know  this  fact, and  assuming  that you  are not  married, take  this  into  
account  when  you  search for  a soul  mate. Look  for someone  whose  sibling  is  married to 
a  productivity-challenged   individual.   
18 

the  truth  about  relativity  
he had  relinquished  his dreams  for  a Wall Street salary, for  a  
chance  to  stop  feeling  "poor."  Is  it  any  wonder  that  family  
practice physicians, who make an  average of $160,000  a year, 
are  in short  supply?*  
CAN  WE  DO  anything  about  this problem  of relativity? 
The  good  news  is that  we can sometimes control the  "cir­
cles"  around   us,  moving  toward  smaller  circles  that  boost  
our  relative  happiness.  If  we  are  at  our  class  reunion,   and   
there's  a  "big  circle"  in  the  middle  of the  room  with  a  drink  
in  his  hand,  boasting  of  his  big  salary,  we  can  consciously  
take  several steps  away  and  talk  with  someone else. If we  are  
thinking  of  buying  a  new  house,  we  can  be  selective  about  
the open  houses  we go to, skipping  the houses  that  are  above  
our  means.  If  we  are  thinking  about  buying  a  new  car,  we  
can  focus  on  the  models that  we can  afford,  and  so  on.  
We  can  also change  our  focus  from  narrow  to  broad.  Let  
me explain  with  an  example from  a  study  conducted  by  two  
brilliant  researchers,  Amos  Tversky  and  Daniel  Kahneman.  
Suppose  you  have  two  errands  to  run  today.  The  first  is  to  
buy a new pen,  and  the second is to buy  a suit for work. At  an  
office  supply  store, you  find  a nice pen  for $25.  You are  set to 
buy  it,  when  you  remember  that  the  same  pen  is  on  sale  for  
$18  at  another  store  15 minutes  away. What  would  you  do?  
Do you decide to take the  15-minute trip to  save the  $7? Most 
people  faced  with  this  dilemma  say that  they  would  take  the  
trip to  save the $7. 
Now  you  are  on  your  second  task:  you're  shopping  for  
*Of  course,  physicians  have other  problems as well,  including  insurance  forms,  
bureaucracy,  and  threats  of  lawsuits  for  malpractice.  
19 

predictably   irrational   
your  suit.  You  find  a  luxurious  gray  pinstripe  suit  for  $455  
and  decide  to  buy  it,  but  then  another  customer  whispers  in  
your  ear  that  the  exact  same  suit  is on  sale  for  only  $448  at  
another  store,  just  15 minutes  away.  Do  you  make  this  sec­
ond  15-minute  trip?  In  this  case,  most  people  say  that  they  
would  not.  
But  what  is  going  on  here?  Is  15  minutes  of  your  time  
worth  $7, or isn't it? In reality, of course, $7 is $7—no  matter  
how  you  count  it. The only question  you  should  ask yourself 
in  these cases is whether  the  trip  across town,  and  the  15 ex­
tra  minutes  it  would  take,  is worth  the  extra  $7  you  would  
save. Whether the amount  from  which this $7 will be saved is 
$10 or $10,000  should  be  irrelevant.  
This  is the problem of relativity—we look at our decisions 
in  a  relative  way  and  compare  them  locally to  the  available  
alternative.  We compare  the  relative  advantage  of the  cheap  
pen  with  the  expensive one,  and  this  contrast  makes  it obvi­
ous  to  us  that  we  should  spend  the extra  time to  save the $7. 
At the  same time, the  relative advantage  of the cheaper  suit is 
very small, so we  spend  the extra $7. 
This  is also why  it  is so easy  for  a person  to  add  $200  to  a  
$5,000  catering  bill  for  a  soup  entrée,  when  the  same  person  
will  clip coupons  to  save 25 cents on  a one-dollar  can of con­
densed  soup.  Similarly, we  find  it easy to  spend  $3,000  to  up­
grade  to  leather  seats  when  we  buy  a  new  $25,000  car,  but  
difficult  to spend  the same amount  on  a new leather sofa  (even  
though  we know  we will spend  more time at home on the  sofa  
than  in the car). Yet if we just thought  about  this  in  a  broader  
perspective, we could  better  assess what  we could  do  with  the  
$3,000  that  we are considering spending  on  upgrading the car 
seats.  Would  we  perhaps  be  better  off  spending  it  on  books,  
clothes,  or  a  vacation? Thinking  broadly  like this  is not  easy,  
20 

the  truth  about   relativity   
because making relative judgments is the natural  way we think. 
Can you get a handle  on  it? I know  someone who  can.  
He  is James Hong,  cofounder  of the Hotornot.com  rating  
and  dating   site.  (James,  his  business  partner  Jim  Young,  
Leonard Lee, George Loewenstein, and  I recently worked  on  
a research project examining how  one's own  "attractiveness"  
affects  one's view of the  "attractiveness" of others.) 
For  sure, James has  made  a lot of money, and  he sees even 
more money  all around  him. One of his good friends,  in fact, 
is a founder  of PayPal and  is worth  tens of millions. But Hong 
knows  how  to  make  the  circles  of  comparison  in  his   life   
smaller,  not  larger.  In  his  case,  he  started   by  selling  his  
Porsche Boxster  and  buying  a Toyota Prius  in  its place.
4 
"I don't  want  to live the  life of a Boxster," he told the   New   
York   Times,   "because when  you  get  a Boxster  you  wish  you  
had  a 911, and  you  know  what  people  who  have  911s wish 
they had? They wish  they  had  a Ferrari." 
That's  a  lesson  we  can  all  learn:  the  more  we  have,  the  
more we want.  And  the only cure is to break the  cycle of rela­
tivity. 
21 



CHAPTER      2      
The  Fallacy of Supply 
and  Demand  
Why  the  Price   of  Pearls—and      Everything        Else—        
Is  Up  in  the  Air  
A
t  the  onset  of World War II, an  Italian  diamond  dealer,  
James  Assael, fled  Europe  for  Cuba.  There,  he  found  a  
new   livelihood:   the   American   army   needed    waterproof    
watches,  and  Assael,  through   his  contacts  in   Switzerland,   
was  able to  fill  the  demand.  
When  the  war  ended,  Assael's  deal  with  the  U.S.  govern­
ment  dried   up,  and   he  was  left  with   thousands   of  Swiss  
watches.  The  Japanese  needed  watches,  of  course.  But  they  
didn't  have  any  money. They did  have pearls,  though—many  
thousands  of  them.  Before  long,  Assael  had  taught  his  son  
how  to  barter  Swiss watches  for  Japanese  pearls.  The  busi­
ness blossomed, and  shortly  thereafter,  the  son,  Salvador As­
sael, became known  as the  "pearl  king."  
The pearl  king  had  moored  his yacht at Saint-Tropez  one  
day  in  1973, when  a dashing  young Frenchman, Jean-Claude 

predictably  irrational  
Brouillet,  came  aboard   from   an  adjacent  yacht.  Brouillet  
had  just  sold  his  air-freight  business  and  with  the  proceeds  
had   purchased    an    atoll   in   French   Polynesia—a    blue-
lagooned  paradise  for  himself and  his  young  Tahitian  wife.  
Brouillet explained  that  its turquoise  waters  abounded  with  
black-lipped  oysters,  Finctada     mar  gar  iti fera.   And  from  the  
black  lips  of  those  oysters  came  something  of  note:  black  
pearls. 
At the  time  there  was  no  market  for Tahitian  black pearls, 
and  little  demand.  But Brouillet persuaded  Assael to  go  into  
business  with  him.  Together  they  would  harvest  black  pearls  
and  sell them  to the world.  At  first,  Assael's marketing  efforts  
failed. The pearls  were  gunmetal  gray, about  the  size of  mus­
ket balls, and  he returned  to Polynesia without  having  made  a  
single  sale. Assael  could  have  dropped  the  black  pearls  alto­
gether  or  sold  them  at  a  low  price  to  a  discount  store.  He  
could have tried  to push them  to consumers  by bundling  them  
together  with  a  few  white  pearls.  But instead  Assael waited  a  
year,  until  the  operation   had  produced   some  better  speci­
mens,  and  then  brought  them  to  an  old  friend,  Harry  Win­
ston,  the  legendary  gemstone  dealer.  Winston  agreed  to  put  
them  in the window  of his store on Fifth  Avenue, with  an  out­
rageously  high  price  tag  attached.  Assael,  meanwhile,  com­
missioned  a  full-page  advertisement  that  ran  in  the  glossiest  
of  magazines. There, a string of Tahitian black pearls  glowed,  
set among  a  spray  of diamonds,  rubies,  and  emeralds.  
The  pearls,  which  had   shortly  before  been  the   private   
business  of  a  cluster  of  black-lipped  oysters,  hanging  on  a  
rope  in the Polynesian sea, were soon parading  through  Man­
hattan  on  the  arched  necks of the  city's most  prosperous  di­
vas. Assael had  taken  something  of dubious  worth  and  made  
it fabulously  fine.  Or,  as Mark  Twain  once noted  about  Tom  
24 

the  fallacy   of   supply   and   demand   
25 
Sawyer,  "Tom  had  discovered  a  great  law  of  human  action,  
namely, that  in  order  to  make  a  man  covet  a thing,  it  is only 
necessary to make the  thing  difficult  to  attain."  
How  DID THE  pearl  king  do  it? How  did  he  persuade   the   
cream  of society to  become passionate  about  Tahitian  black  
pearls—and  pay  him  royally  for  them?  In  order  to  answer  
this question,  I need  to explain something  about  baby geese. 
A  few  decades  ago, the  naturalist  Konrad  Lorenz discov­
ered  that  goslings, upon  breaking  out  of their  eggs, become 
attached  to  the  first  moving  object  they  encounter  (which  is  
generally their  mother). Lorenz knew  this  because in one ex­
periment  he  became  the  first  thing  they  saw,  and  they   fol­
lowed  him  loyally  from  then  on  through  adolescence. With 
that,  Lorenz  demonstrated  not  only  that  goslings  make  ini­
tial decisions based  on  what's  available in their  environment,  
but  that  they  stick  with  a  decision  once  it  has  been  made.  
Lorenz called this natural  phenomenon      imprinting.      
Is the  human  brain,  then,  wired  like that  of a  gosling? Do 
our  first  impressions  and  decisions become imprinted?  And if 
so,  how  does  this  imprinting  play  out  in  our  lives? When  we  
encounter  a new  product,  for  instance, do  we  accept the  first  
price that  comes before our  eyes ? And more importantly,  does  
that  price  (which  in academic lingo we call  an  anchor)    have  a  
long-term  effect  on  our  willingness  to  pay  for  the   product   
from  then  on ? 
It  seems  that  what's  good  for  the  goose  is  good  for  hu­
mans  as  well. And  this  includes  anchoring.  From  the  begin­
ning,  for  instance, Assael "anchored"  his  pearls  to  the  finest  
gems  in  the  world—and   the  prices  followed  forever   after.   
Similarly,  once  we  buy  a  new  product  at  a  particular  price,  

predictably  irrational  
we become anchored to that  price. But how exactly does  this  
work? Why do  we accept anchors? 
Consider this: if I asked you for the last two  digits of your 
social security number  (mine are 79), then asked you whether 
you  would  pay  this  number  in  dollars  (for  me this  would  be  
$79)  for  a particular  bottle of Côtes  du  Rhône  1998,  would  
the  mere suggestion of that  number  influence how  much  you  
would  be  willing  to  spend  on  wine?  Sounds  preposterous,  
doesn't  it? Well, wait until  you  see what  happened  to  a  group  
of MBA  students  at MIT a few years ago. 
"Now  HERE  WE have  a nice Côtes du  Rhône Jaboulet Paral­
lel,"  said  Drazen  Prelec,  a  professor  at MIT's  Sloan  School  
of  Management,  as  he  lifted  a  bottle  admiringly.  "It's  a  
1998." 
At  the  time,  sitting  before  him  were  the  55 students  from  
his  marketing  research  class.  On  this  day,  Drazen,  George  
Loewenstein  (a professor  at Carnegie Mellon University),  and  
I would  have an  unusual  request for this group of future  mar­
keting pros. We would  ask them  to jot down  the last two  dig­
its  of  their  social security  numbers  and  tell  us  whether  they  
would  pay  this  amount  for  a  number  of products,  including  
the  bottle of wine. Then, we  would  ask  them  to  actually  bid  
on these items in an  auction.  
What  were  we trying  to  prove? The existence of what  we  
called  arbitrary     coherence.     The basic idea of arbitrary coher­
ence  is this:  although  initial  prices  (such  as  the  price of As­
sad's pearls) are "arbitrary," once those prices are established 
in our  minds  they will shape not  only present  prices but  also  
future  prices  (this makes them  "coherent"). So, would  think­
ing  about  one's  social security number  be enough  to  create  
26 

the  fallacy   of   supply   and   demand   
27 
an  anchor?  And  would  that  initial  anchor  have  a  long-term  
influence? That's what  we wanted  to see. 
"For  those  of  you  who  don't  know  much  about  wines,"  
Drazen   continued,   "this   bottle   received  eighty-six  points  
from  Wine   Spectator.    It  has  the  flavor  of  red  berry,  mocha,  
and black chocolate; it's a medium-bodied,  medium-intensity,  
nicely balanced  red,  and  it makes for  delightful  drinking."  
Drazen  held  up  another  bottle.  This  was  a  Hermitage  
Jaboulet  La  Chapelle,  1996,  with  a 92-point rating  from  the  
Wine    Advocate      magazine.  "The   finest  La  Chapelle  since  
1990,"  Drazen  intoned,  while  the  students  looked  up  curi­
ously. "Only 8,100 cases made  .  . ." 
In turn, Drazen  held  up  four  other  items: a cordless track­
ball (TrackMan Marble FX by Logitech) ; a cordless keyboard 
and  mouse  (iTouch by Logitech);  a  design  book  (The    Perfect    
Package:    How  to  Add   Value   through    Graphic    Design);   and  a  
one-pound  box of Belgian chocolates by  Neuhaus.  
Drazen  passed  out  forms  that  listed  all the  items. "Now  I  
want  you  to  write  the  last  two  digits  of your  social  security  
number  at  the  top  of  the  page,"  he  instructed.  "And  then  
write  them  again  next  to  each  of the  items  in  the  form  of  a  
price.  In  other  words,  if the  last two  digits  are  twenty-three,  
write twenty-three  dollars."  
"Now  when  you're  finished  with  that,"  he  added,  "I  want  
you  to  indicate  on  your  sheets—with  a  simple  yes  or  no—  
whether you would  pay that  amount  for each of the  products."  
When  the  students  had   finished  answering  yes  or  no  to  
each  item,  Drazen  asked  them  to  write  down  the  maximum  
amount  they  were  willing  to  pay  for  each  of  the   products   
(their  bids). Once they  had  written  down  their  bids, the  stu­
dents passed the  sheets up to me and  I entered their  responses  
into  my  laptop  and  announced  the  winners.  One  by  one  the  

predictably   irrational   
student  who had  made the highest  bid for each of the  products  
would  step  up  to  the  front  of the  class,  pay  for  the  product,*  
and  take  it with  them.  
The  students  enjoyed this class exercise, but  when  I asked 
them  if they  felt that  writing  down the  last two  digits of their 
social  security  numbers  had  influenced  their  final  bids,  they  
quickly  dismissed  my  suggestion. No  way!  
When  I got  back to  my  office,  I analyzed  the  data.  Did  the  
digits  from  the  social security  numbers  serve  as  anchors? Re­
markably, they did:  the  students  with  the highest-ending social 
security digits  (from 80 to 99)  bid highest, while those with  the  
lowest-ending  numbers  (1 to  20)  bid  lowest. The  top  20  per­
cent,  for  instance,  bid  an  average of $56 for  the  cordless key­
board; the bottom 20 percent bid an  average of $16. In the  end,  
we could see that  students  with  social security numbers  ending  
in the upper 20 percent placed bids that were 216 to 346 percent 
higher  than  those of the  students  with  social security  numbers  
ending  in the lowest 20 percent  (see table on  the facing page). 
Now  if the last two  digits of your  social security number  are  
a  high  number  I know  what  you  must  be  thinking:  "I've  been  
paying too  much  for  everything  my entire  life!"  This is not  the  
case,  however.  Social  security numbers  were  the  anchor  in  this  
experiment only because we requested them. We could have just 
as well asked for the current  temperature  or the  manufacturer's  
suggested  retail  price  (MSRP).  Any  question,  in  fact,  would  
have  created  the  anchor.  Does  that  seem  rational?  Of  course  
not. But that's  the way we are—goslings, after all.* 
::
 The price the  highest  bidder paid  for an  item  was  based  not  on  his  own  bid,  but  on  that  
of  the  second  highest  bidder. This  is called  a second price auction. William Vickrey 
received  the Nobel  prize  in economics for demonstrating that  this type of  auction  
creates  the conditions  where  it  is  in  people's  best  interest to  bid  the maximum amount 
they  are willing to pay  for each item  (this  is also  the general logic  behind  the  auction  
system  on  eBay).  
fWhen  I've tried this  kind  of experiment on  executives and managers (at the MIT  Execu-
28 

the   fallacy  of   supply   and   demand   
Average  prices  paid  for the  various products for each  of the  five  groups of 
final  digits  in  social  security numbers, and the  correlations between  these  
digits  and the bids submitted  in the auction. 
Range of last two  digits  of SS  number  
Products 00-19 20-39 40-59 
60-79 
80-99  Correlations*  
Cordless trackball 
$8.64 
$11.82 $13.45 $21.18 $26.18 
0.42 
Cordless keyboard 
$16.09 $26.82 
$29.27 
$34.55 
$55.64 0.52 
Design book 
$12.82 
$16.18 
$15.82 $19.27 
$30.00 
0.32 
Neuhaus chocolates 
$9.55 $10.64 
$12.45 
$13.27 $20.64 0.42 
1998 Côtes du Rhône 
$8.64 
$14.45 $12.55 $15.45 
$27.91 0.33 
1996 Hermitage $11.73 
$22.45 
$18.09 
$24.55 $37.55 
0.33 
•Correlation  is a statistical  measure of  how  much the  movement  of two variables is  related.  The  
range of possible  correlations is between -1  and +1,  where a  correlation of 0  means  that  the  change  
in  value  of one  variable has  no bearing on the change  in value  of the  other variable. 
The  data  had  one  more  interesting  aspect.  Although   the   
willingness to pay  for these items was arbitrary,  there  was  also  
a  logical, coherent  aspect to it. When  we looked  at the  bids  for  
the two pairs of related items  (the two  wines and  the two  com­
puter components), their relative prices seemed incredibly logi­
cal.  Everyone  was  willing  to  pay  more  for  the  keyboard  than  
for  the  trackball—and  also  pay  more  for  the  1996 Hermitage 
than  for  the  1998 Côtes  du  Rhône. The  significance of this  is  
that  once  the  participants  were  willing  to  pay  a  certain  price  
for  one product, their  willingness to  pay  for  other  items  in  the  
same  product  category  was  judged  relative  to  that  first  price  
(the anchor). 
tive  Education Program),  I've  had  similar  success  making  their  social  security  numbers  
influence  the prices they  were willing to pay  for chocolates, books,  and other products. 
29 

predictably   irrational   
This,  then,  is  what   we  call  arbitrary  coherence.  Initial  
prices  are  largely  "arbitrary"  and  can  be  influenced  by  re­
sponses to random  questions; but once those prices are estab­
lished  in our  minds,  they  shape  not  only what  we are  willing  
to  pay  for  an  item,  but  also how  much  we  are  willing to  pay  
for  related products  (this makes them coherent). 
Now  I need to  add  one important  clarification to the  story  
I've just told.  In  life  we are  bombarded  by prices. We see the 
manufacturer's  suggested  retail  price  (MSRP)  for  cars,  lawn  
mowers,  and  coffeemakers.  We  get  the  real  estate  agent's  
spiel on  local housing prices. But price tags  by themselves  are  
not  necessarily anchors. They become anchors when  we con­
template  buying  a product  or  service at that  particular  price.  
That's  when  the  imprint  is set. From  then  on,  we  are  willing  
to  accept  a  range  of prices—but  as with  the  pull  of a  bungee  
cord,  we  always  refer  back  to  the  original  anchor.  Thus  the  
first  anchor  influences  not  only  the  immediate  buying  deci­
sion  but  many  others  that  follow.  
We  might  see  a  57-inch LCD  high-definition  television  on  
sale  for  $3,000,  for  instance. The  price  tag  is not  the  anchor.  
But if we decide to buy it (or seriously contemplate buying  it) at 
that price, then  the decision becomes our  anchor henceforth  in  
terms  of LCD  television  sets.  That's  our  peg  in  the  ground,  
and  from  then  on—whether  we shop for another  set or merely 
have  a  conversation  at  a  backyard  cookout—all  other  high-
definition  televisions are judged  relative to that price. 
Anchoring  influences  all  kinds  of  purchases.  Uri  Simon-
sohn  (a professor at the University of Pennsylvania) and George 
Loewenstein,  for  example, found  that  people  who  move to  a  
new city generally remain  anchored to the prices they paid  for  
housing  in  their  former  city.  In  their  study  they  found   that   
people  who  move  from  inexpensive  markets  (say, Lubbock, 
30 

the  fallacy  of   supply   and  demand  
*The  result was  not  due to wealth,  taxes,  or other   financial   reasons.   
31 
Texas)  to  moderately  priced  cities  (say, Pittsburgh)  don't  in­
crease  their  spending  to  fit  the  new  market.*  Rather,  these  
people  spend  an  amount  similar to what  they  were  used  to  in  
the  previous  market,  even  if  this  means  having  to  squeeze  
themselves and  their  families into  smaller or  less comfortable 
homes. Likewise, transplants  from  more  expensive cities sink 
the  same  dollars  into  their  new  housing  situation  as  they  did  
in the past. People who  move from  Los Angeles to  Pittsburgh,  
in other words, don't  generally downsize  their  spending  much  
once  they  hit  Pennsylvania:  they  spend  an  amount  similar  to  
what  they  used  to  spend  in Los Angeles. 
It  seems  that  we  get  used  to  the  particularities  of  our  
housing  markets  and  don't  readily change. The only way  out  
of  this box, in fact,  is to rent  a home  in the new location for  a  
year  or  so. That  way,  we  adjust  to  the  new  environment—  
and,  after  a while, we are able to make  a purchase  that  aligns  
with  the  local  market.  
So   WE  ANCHOR  ourselves  to  initial  prices.  But  do  we  hop  
from  one  anchor  price to  another  (flip-flopping,  if you  will),  
continually  changing  our  willingness  to  pay?  Or  does  the  
first  anchor  we encounter  become our  anchor  for  a long  time  
and  for  many  decisions? To answer  this question,  we  decided  
to conduct  another  experiment—one  in which  we  attempted  
to lure our  participants  from  old anchors to new  ones.  
For  this  experiment  we  enlisted  some  undergraduate  stu­
dents,  some graduate  students,  and  some investment  bankers  
who  had  come  to  the  campus  to  recruit  new  employees  for  
their  firms.  Once  the  experiment  started  we  presented  our  

predictably   irrational   
participants  with  three  different  sounds,  and  following each, 
asked  them  if they  would  be willing to  get paid  a  particular  
amount of money  (which served as the price anchor) for hear­
ing  those  sounds  again.  One  sound  was  a  30-second high-
pitched 3,000-hertz sound, somewhat like someone screaming 
in   a   high-pitched   voice.   Another   was   a  30-second  full-
spectrum  noise  (also called white  noise),  which  is similar  to  
the  noise  a  television  set  makes  when  there  is no  reception.  
The  third  was  a 30-second oscillation between  high-pitched  
and  low-pitched  sounds.  (I am  not  sure if the bankers  under­
stood exactly what  they were about to experience, but  maybe  
even  our  annoying  sounds  were  less  annoying  than  talking  
about  investment banking.) 
We used sounds  because there is no existing market for  an­
noying sounds  (so the participants couldn't  use a market price 
as  a  way  to  think  about  the  value  of these  sounds). We also 
used  annoying  sounds,  specifically, because no  one likes such 
sounds  (if we had  used classical music, some would  have liked 
it better than  others). As for the  sounds  themselves, I selected 
them  after  creating hundreds of sounds,  choosing these  three  
because they were, in  my opinion, equally annoying. 
We placed our participants  in front  of computer screens at 
the lab, and  had  them  clamp headphones  over their ears. 
As  the  room  quieted  down,  the  first  group  saw  this  mes­
sage  appear  in  front  of them:  "In  a  few  moments  we  are go­
ing to  play  a new  unpleasant  tone  over your  headset.  We are 
interested in how annoying you  find it. Immediately after  you  
hear  the  tone,  we  will  ask  you  whether,  hypothetically, you 
would  be  willing to  repeat  the  same  experience in exchange 
for  a  payment  of  10 cents." The  second  group  got  the  same  
message, only with  an  offer  of 90 cents rather  than  10 cents. 
Would  the  anchor  prices make  a  difference? To  find  out,  
32 

the  fallacy  of   supply   and  demand  
To   ensure that  the  bids  we  got  were indeed  the lowest  prices for which  the participants 
would  listen  to the annoying sounds,  we  used  the  "Becker-DeGroot-Marschak  
procedure." This  is  an auction-like procedure,  in  which  each of the participants  bids  
against  a price  randomly drawn by  a  computer.  
33 
we turned  on the sound—in  this case the irritating 30-second, 
3,000-hertz  squeal. Some of our participants  grimaced. Oth­
ers rolled their eyes. 
When  the  screeching  ended,  each  participant  was  pre­
sented  with  the  anchoring  question,  phrased  as  a  hypotheti­
cal  choice:  Would  the  participant  be  willing, hypothetically, 
to  repeat  the  experience  for  a  cash  payment  (which  was  10  
cents  for  the  first  group  and  90 cents for  the  second  group) ? 
After   answering  this  anchoring  question,  the   participants   
were asked to indicate on the computer screen the lowest price 
they would demand  to listen to the sound  again. This decision 
was  real,  by  the  way,  as  it  would  determine  whether  they  
would  hear the sound  again—and  get paid  for doing so.* 
Soon   after   the   participants   entered   their   prices,  they  
learned  the  outcome.  Participants  whose  price  was   suffi­
ciently  low  "won"  the  sound,  had  the  (unpleasant)  opportu­
nity to hear it again, and got paid for doing so. The participants 
whose  price  was  too  high  did  not  listen  to  the  sound   and   
were not paid  for this part of the experiment. 
What  was  the  point  of  all  this?  We  wanted  to  find  out  
whether  the  first  prices  that  we  suggested  (10 cents  and  90  
cents)  had  served  as  an  anchor. And  indeed  they  had.  Those  
who  first  faced  the  hypothetical  decision  about  whether  to  
listen to the sound  for  10 cents needed  much  less money to be 
willing  to  listen  to  this  sound  again  (33  cents  on  average)  
relative  to  those  who  first  faced  the  hypothetical  decision  
about  whether  to  listen to  the  sound  for  90 cents—this  sec­
ond  group  demanded  more than  twice the compensation  (73  

predictably  irrational  
cents  on  average) for  the  same annoying experience. Do  you  
see the  difference that  the  suggested price had? 
BUT   THIS   WAS  only  the  start  of  our  exploration.  We  also  
wanted  to  know  how  influential  the  anchor  would  be  in  fu­
ture decisions. Suppose we gave the participants  an  opportu­
nity to drop this anchor and  run  for  another? Would they  do  
it? To put  it in terms of goslings, would  they swim across the 
pond  after  their  original  imprint  and  then,  midway,  swing  
their  allegiance to  a new mother goose? In terms of goslings, 
I  think  you  know  that  they  would  stick  with  the  original  
mom.  But what  about  humans?  The next  two  phases  of the 
experiment  would  enable us to answer  these questions. 
In  the  second  phase  of  the  experiment,  we  took  partici­
pants  from  the  previous  10-cents and  90-cents groups  and  
treated  them  to 30 seconds of a white, wooshing noise. "Hy-
pothetically,  would  you  listen  to  this  sound   again  for  50  
cents?"  we asked them  at the end. The respondents  pressed  a  
button  on their computers to indicate yes or no. 
"OK,  how  much   would  you  need  to  be paid  for this?" we 
asked.  Our  participants  typed  in  their  lowest price; the com­
puter  did  its thing; and, depending  on their bids, some partici­
pants  listened  to  the  sound  again  and  got  paid  and  some  did  
not. When we compared the prices, the  10-cents group  offered  
much  lower bids than  the 90-cents group. This means that  al­
though  both groups had  been equally exposed to the suggested 
50  cents,  as  their  focal  anchoring  response  (to  "Hypotheti-
cally, would  you listen to this sound  again for 50 cents?"),  the  
first  anchor  in  this  annoying  sound  category  (which  was  10  
cents for some and 90 cents for others)  predominated.  
Why?  Perhaps  the  participants  in  the  10-cents group  said  
34 

the  fallacy  of  supply   and  demand  
something  like the  following  to  themselves:  "Well,  I listened 
previously  to  that  annoying  sound  for  a  low  amount.  This  
sound  is not  much  different.  So if I said  a low amount  for  the  
previous  one,  I  guess  I  could  bear  this  sound  for  about  the  
same price." Those who  were  in the 90-cents group  used  the  
same  type  of logic,  but  because their  starting  point  was  dif­
ferent,  so  was  their  ending  point.  These  individuals   told   
themselves,   "Well,   I  listened  previously   to  that   annoying   
sound  for  a  high  amount.  This  sound  is not  much  different.  
So  since I said  a  high  amount  for  the  previous  one,  I guess  I  
could  bear  this  sound  for  about  the  same price." Indeed,  the  
effect  of the  first  anchor  held—indicating  that  anchors  have  
an  enduring   effect   for  present  prices  as  well  as  for   future   
prices. 
There was one more step to this experiment. This time  we  
had  our  participants  listen  to  the  oscillating sound  that  rose  
and  fell  in pitch  for 30 seconds. We asked our  10-cents group, 
"Hypothetically,  would  you  listen  to  this  sound  again  for 90 
cents?"  Then  we  asked  our  90-cents group,  "Would  you  lis­
ten  to  this  sound  again  for  10  cents?"  Having  flipped   our   
anchors,  we  would  now  see  which  one,  the  local  anchor  or  
the  first  anchor, exerted the  greatest  influence.  
Once  again,  the  participants  typed  in  yes or  no. Then  we  
asked  them  for  real  bids:  "How  much  would  it take  for  you  
to listen to this again?" At this point,  they had  a history  with  
three  anchors:  the  first  one  they  encountered  in  the  experi­
ment  (either  10 cents or 90 cents),  the  second one  (50 cents), 
and  the  most  recent  one  (either 90 cents or  10 cents). Which 
one  of  these  would  have  the  largest  influence  on  the  price  
they demanded  to listen to the  sound?  
Again,  it was  as if our participants'  minds  told them, "If I 
listened  to  the  first  sound  for  x  cents,  and  listened  to  the  
35 

predictably   irrational   
second  sound  for  x  cents as well, then  I can surely do this  one  
for  x  cents, too!"  And  that's  what  they  did.  Those who  had  
first  encountered  the   10-cent  anchor  accepted  low  prices,  
even after 90 cents was suggested  as the anchor. On the  other  
hand,  those  who  had  first  encountered  the  90-cent  anchor  
kept  on  demanding  much  higher prices, regardless  of the  an­
chors that  followed.  
What  did  we  show? That  our  first  decisions resonate  over  
a long sequence of decisions. First impressions are  important,  
whether  they  involve remembering  that  our  first  DVD player 
cost  much  more  than  such  players  cost today  (and  realizing  
that,  in comparison, the current  prices are  a steal) or  remem­
bering  that  gas  was  once  a  dollar  a  gallon,  which  makes  ev­
ery  trip  to  the  gas  station  a  painful  experience. In  all  these  
cases  the  random,  and  not  so  random,  anchors  that  we  en­
countered  along the  way  and  were  swayed  by remain  with  us  
long after  the  initial decision itself. 
Now  THAT  WE know  we behave like goslings, it is  important  
to  understand  the  process  by which  our  first  decisions  trans­
late into  long-term  habits. To illustrate  this process, consider 
this  example. You're walking  past  a  restaurant,  and  you  see  
two  people  standing  in  line, waiting  to  get  in. "This must  be  
a  good  restaurant,"  you think  to yourself.  "People are  stand­
ing  in  line." So you  stand  behind  these  people.  Another  per­
son  walks  by.  He  sees  three  people  standing   in  line  and  
thinks,  "This  must  be  a  fantastic  restaurant,"  and  joins  the  
line.  Others  join.  We  call  this  type  of  behavior  herding.  It  
happens  when  we assume  that  something  is good  (or bad)  on  
the  basis  of  other  people's  previous  behavior,  and  our  own  
actions follow  suit.  
36 

the  fallacy  of   supply   and  demand  
37 
But  there's  also another  kind  of herding,  one  that  we  call  
self-herding.  This  happens   when   we  believe  something  is  
good  (or bad)  on  the  basis of our  own  previous  behavior. Es­
sentially,  once  we  become the  first  person  in  line  at  the  res­
taurant,  we  begin  to  line  up  behind  ourself  in  subsequent  
experiences. Does that  make  sense? Let me explain. 
Recall  your  first  introduction  to  Starbucks, perhaps  sev­
eral  years  ago.  (I  assume  that  nearly  everyone  has  had  this  
experience,  since Starbucks sits on  every corner  in America.) 
You are  sleepy and  in desperate  need of a liquid  energy  boost  
as  you  embark   on   an  errand   one  afternoon.   You  glance  
through  the windows  at Starbucks and  walk  in. The prices of 
the  coffee  are  a  shock—you've  been  blissfully  drinking  the  
brew at Dunkin'  Donuts  for years. But since you have  walked  
in  and  are now  curious  about  what  coffee  at  this price  might  
taste like, you surprise  yourself: you  buy  a small coffee,  enjoy  
its taste  and  its effect  on you, and  walk  out.  
The  following week  you walk  by Starbucks again.  Should  
you  go  in?  The  ideal  decision-making  process  should  take  
into  account  the   quality   of  the   coffee   (Starbucks  versus  
Dunkin' Donuts); the prices at the two places; and, of course, 
the  cost  (or  value)  of  walking  a  few  more  blocks  to  get  to  
Dunkin' Donuts. This is a complex computation—so  instead,  
you  resort  to  the  simple  approach:  "I  went  to  Starbucks be­
fore,  and  I  enjoyed  myself  and  the  coffee,  so  this  must  be  a  
good  decision for  me." So you  walk  in  and  get another  small  
cup of  coffee.  
In  doing  so,  you  just  became  the  second  person  in  line,  
standing  behind  yourself.  A  few  days  later,  you  again  walk  
by  Starbucks  and  this  time,  you  vividly  remember  your  past  
decisions  and  act  on  them  again—voilà!  You  become  the  
third  person  in  line, standing  behind  yourself.  As  the  weeks  

predictably   irrational   
38 
pass, you enter again  and  again  and  every time, you  feel  more  
strongly  that  you  are  acting on  the  basis of your  preferences.  
Buying coffee  at Starbucks has become a habit  with  you.  
BUT  THE  STORY  doesn't  end  there. Now  that  you  have  gotten  
used  to paying  more  for  coffee,  and  have bumped  yourself  up  
onto  a new  curve of consumption,  other  changes also become 
simpler. Perhaps  you will now  move up  from  the small cup  for  
$2.20  to  the  medium  size for  $3.50  or  to  the  Vend  for  $4.15.  
Even  though   you  don't  know  how  you  got  into  this  price  
bracket  in  the  first  place, moving  to  a  larger  coffee  at  a  rela-
tively greater price seems pretty  logical. So is a lateral move to 
other  offerings  at  Starbucks: Caffè  Americano, Caffè Misto, 
Macchiato,  and  Frappuccino, for instance. 
If  you  stopped  to  think  about  this,  it  would  not  be  clear  
whether  you  should  be  spending  all  this  money  on  coffee  at  
Starbucks  instead  of  getting  cheaper  coffee  at  Dunkin'  Do-
nuts  or  even  free  coffee   at  the  office.  But  you  don't   think   
about  these  trade-offs  anymore.  You've  already  made  this  
decision  many  times in the past,  so you now  assume that  this  
is  the  way  you  want  to  spend  your  money.  You've  herded  
yourself—lining    up    behind    your    initial    experience   at   
Starbucks—and  now  you're part of the  crowd.  
HOWEVER,  THERE  IS  something  odd  in  this  story. If anchor-
ing  is based  on our  initial decisions, how  did  Starbucks  man-
age  to  become  an  initial  decision  in  the  first  place? In  other  
words, if we were previously anchored to the prices at Dunkin' 
Donuts,  how  did  we  move  our  anchor  to  Starbucks? This  is  
where  it gets really  interesting.  

the  fallacy   of   supply   and   demand   
39 
When Howard  Shultz created Starbucks, he was as intuitive 
a  businessman  as  Salvador  Assael.  He  worked  diligently  to  
separate  Starbucks from  other  coffee  shops, not  through  price  
but  through   ambience.  Accordingly,  he  designed  Starbucks  
from  the very beginning to  feel  like a continental coffeehouse. 
The  early  shops  were  fragrant  with  the  smell  of  roasted  
beans (and better-quality roasted beans than those at Dunkin' 
Donuts).  They  sold  fancy  French  coffee  presses. The  show-
cases presented  alluring snacks—almond croissants, biscotti, 
raspberry  custard pastries, and others. Whereas Dunkin' Do-
nuts had  small, medium,  and  large coffees,  Starbucks  offered  
Short,  Tall,  Grande,  and  Venti, as  well  as  drinks  with  high-
pedigree  names  like Caffè Americano, Caffè Misto, Macchi-
ato,  and  Frappuccino. Starbucks did  everything  in  its  power,  
in other  words, to make the experience feel  different—so  dif-
ferent  that  we would  not  use the prices at Dunkin'  Donuts  as  
an  anchor, but  instead  would  be open  to the new  anchor  that  
Starbucks was preparing  for us. And that,  to  a great extent, is 
how  Starbucks succeeded. 
GEORGE,   DRAZEN,  AND   I  were  so  excited  with  the  experi-
ments  on  coherent  arbitrariness  that  we  decided  to  push  the  
idea  one  step  farther.  This time,  we  had  a  different  twist  to  
explore. 
Do  you  remember  the  famous  episode  in  The      Adventures      
of  Tom  Sawyer,   the one in which Tom turned  the  whitewash-
ing of Aunt  Polly's fence into  an  exercise in  manipulating  his  
friends?  As  I'm  sure  you  recall, Tom  applied  the  paint  with  
gusto, pretending  to  enjoy the  job. "Do  you  call  this  work?"  
Tom  told  his friends.  "Does a boy get  a chance to  whitewash  
a  fence every day?" Armed  with  this  new  "information,"  his  

predictably  irrational  
friends  discovered  the  joys of  whitewashing  a  fence. Before 
long,  Tom's  friends  were  not  only  paying  him  for  the  privi­
lege,  but  deriving  real  pleasure  from   the  task—a   win-win   
outcome  if there  ever was  one.  
From  our  perspective,  Tom  transformed  a  negative  expe­
rience to  a positive one—he  transformed  a situation  in  which  
compensation  was  required  to  one  in  which  people  (Tom's  
friends)  would  pay  to  get  in  on  the  fun.  Could  we  do  the  
same? We thought  we'd  give it  a  try.  
One  day, to the  surprise  of my students,  I opened  the  day's  
lecture  on  managerial  psychology  with  a  poetry  selection, a 
few   lines  of  "Whoever  you  are  holding  me  now  in   hand"   
from  Walt Whitman's  Leaves    of   Grass:   
Whoever    you  are  holding    me  now  in    hand,    
Without    one  thing   all  will   be    useless,    
I  give  you  fair   warning     before    you  attempt     me     
further, 
I  am  not  what   you  supposed,     but  far      different.      
Who   is he  that   would    become    my      follower?      
Who   would    sign   himself     a  candidate     for  my  
affections? 
The   way  is  suspicious,     the  result   uncertain,        perhaps        
destructive, 
You   would    have   to  give   up  all  else,   I  alone      would      
expect    to  be  your   sole   and  exclusive         standard,         
Your   novitiate     would    even   then   be  long   and   
exhausting, 
The   whole    past   theory    of  your   life  and  all  
conformity      to  the  lives   around    you  would    have   to   
be  abandon      d,      
Therefore      release    me  now   before    troubling        yourself        
40 

the  fallacy  of   supply   and   demand   
41 
any  further,   let  go  your   hand   from   my       shoulders,       
Put  me  down   and  depart    on  your    way.    
After  closing the book, I told  the  students  that  I would  be  
conducting  three  readings  from  Walt  Whitman's  Leaves     of     
Grass   that  Friday  evening:  one  short,  one  medium,  and  one  
long.  Owing  to  limited  space,  I told  them,  I  had  decided  to  
hold  an  auction  to  determine  who  could  attend.  I passed  out  
sheets of paper  so that  they  could  bid  for  a space; but  before  
they did  so, I had  a question to ask  them.  
I  asked  half  the  students  to  write  down  whether,  hypo-
thetically,  they  would  be  willing  to  pay  me  $10  for  a  10-
minute poetry recitation. I asked the other half to write  down  
whether, hypothetically, they would  be willing to listen to me 
recite poetry  for  ten  minutes if I paid  them $10. 
This,  of  course,  served  as  the  anchor.  Now  I  asked  the  
students  to  bid for  a spot  at  my poetry  reading. Do you  think  
the initial anchor influenced the ensuing bids? 
Before  I  tell  you,  consider  two  things.  First,  my  skills  at  
reading  poetry  are  not  of the  first  order.  So asking someone 
to  pay  me  for  10 minutes  of it could  be considered  a  stretch.  
Second, even though  I asked half  of the students  if they  would  
pay  me  for  the  privilege  of  attending  the  recitation,  they  
didn't have to bid that  way. They could have turned  the tables 
completely  and  demanded  that  I pay  them.  
And  now  to  the  results  (drumroll,  please).  Those who  an­
swered the hypothetical question about paying me were indeed 
willing to  pay  me  for  the  privilege. They offered,  on  average,  
to  pay  me  about  a  dollar  for  the  short  poetry  reading,  about  
two  dollars  for  the  medium  poetry  reading,  and  a  bit  more  
than  three dollars for the long poetry  reading.  (Maybe I could 
make a living outside academe after all.) 

predictably   irrational   
But,  what  about  those  who  were  anchored  to  the  thought  
of  being  paid  (rather  than  paying  me)  ? As you  might  expect,  
they  demanded  payment:  on  average,  they  wanted  $1.30 to 
listen  to  the  short  poetry  reading,  $2.70  to  listen  to  the  me­
dium  poetry  reading,  and  $4.80  to  endure  the  long  poetry  
reading. 
Much  like Tom Sawyer, then,  I was  able to take an  ambig­
uous  experience  (and  if you  could  hear  me  recite poetry,  you  
would  understand  just how ambiguous  this experience is) and 
arbitrarily  make  it  into  a  pleasurable  or  painful  experience.  
Neither  group  of  students  knew  whether  my  poetry  reading  
was  of the  quality  that  is worth  paying  for  or  of the  quality  
that  is worth  listening to  only if one  is being  financially  com­
pensated  for the experience (they did  not know if it is pleasur­
able or painful). But once the first impression had  been  formed  
(that  they  would  pay  me  or  that  I  would  pay  them),  the  die  
was  cast and  the anchor  set. Moreover, once the  first  decision  
had  been made, other decisions followed in what  seemed to be 
a  logical  and  coherent  manner.  The  students  did  not  know  
whether  listening to me recite poetry  was  a good or bad expe­
rience,  but  whatever  their  first  decision  was,  they  used  it  as  
input  for  their  subsequent  decisions and  provided  a  coherent  
pattern  of responses  across the three poetry  readings.  
Of  course, Mark Twain came to the same conclusions: "If 
Tom  had  been  a great and  wise philosopher, like the writer of 
this book, he would  now  have comprehended  that  work  con­
sists of whatever  a  body  is obliged to  do,  and  that  play  con­
sists  of whatever  a  body  is not  obliged  to  do."  Mark  Twain  
further  observed:  "There  are  wealthy  gentlemen  in  England  
who   drive   four-horse   passenger-coaches  twenty   or   thirty   
miles  on  a  daily  line  in  the  summer  because  the  privilege  
costs  them   considerable  money;  but   if  they   were   offered   
42 

the  fallacy   of   supply   and   demand   
*We  will  return  to  this  astute observation  in  the chapter on  social  and  market norms 
(Chapter 4). 
43 
wages  for the  service, that  would  turn  it into work,  and  then  
they  would  resign."*  
WHERE   DO  THESE  thoughts  lead  us? For one, they  illustrate  
the  many  choices we make, from  the  trivial  to  the  profound,  
in which  anchoring plays  a role. We decide whether  or not  to  
purchase  Big Macs,  smoke, run  red  lights, take  vacations  in  
Patagonia,  listen  to  Tchaikovsky, slave  away  at  doctoral  dis­
sertations,  marry,  have  children,  live  in  the  suburbs,  vote  
Republican,  and  so  on.  According  to  economic  theory,  we  
base  these  decisions  on  our  fundamental   values—our  likes  
and  dislikes.  
But  what  are  the  main  lessons  from  these  experiments  
about  our  lives in  general? Could  it  be that  the  lives we  have  
so carefully  crafted  are largely just  a product  of arbitrary co­
herence?  Could  it  be  that  we  made  arbitrary   decisions  at  
some point  in the past  (like the  goslings that  adopted  Lorenz  
as  their  parent)  and  have  built  our  lives on  them  ever since, 
assuming  that  the  original  decisions  were  wise?  Is that  how  
we chose our  careers, our  spouses,  the  clothes  we  wear,  and  
the  way  we  style  our  hair?  Were  they  smart  decisions  in  the  
first  place? Or  were  they  partially  random  first  imprints  that  
have run  wild?  
Descartes  said,  Cogito     ergo    sum—"I    think,  therefore  I  
am."  But suppose  we  are  nothing  more  than  the  sum  of  our  
first,  naive, random  behaviors. What  then?  
These  questions  may  be tough  nuts to crack, but  in  terms  
of  our personal  lives, we can actively improve on our  irrational  

predictably   irrational   
behaviors.  We can  start  by  becoming  aware  of our  vulnera­
bilities.  Suppose  you're  planning  to  buy  a  cutting-edge  cell  
phone   (the  one  with  the  three-megapixel,  8x  zoom  digital  
camera), or  even  a daily $4 cup of gourmet  coffee.  You might 
begin  by  questioning  that  habit.  How  did  it  begin? Second, 
ask  yourself what  amount  of pleasure  you  will be getting  out  
of  it.  Is the  pleasure  as  much  as you  thought  you  would  get?  
Could  you  cut  back  a  little  and  better  spend  the  remaining  
money  on  something  else? With  everything  you  do,  in  fact,  
you  should  train  yourself  to  question  your  repeated  behav­
iors. In the  case of the  cell phone,  could you take  a step back 
from  the  cutting  edge,  reduce  your  outlay,  and  use  some of 
the  money  for  something  else? And  as for  the  coffee—rather  
than  asking  which  blend  of  coffee  you  will  have  today,  ask  
yourself  whether  you should  even be having that  habitual  cup  
of  expensive coffee  at all.* 
We  should  also  pay  particular  attention  to  the  first  deci­
sion  we  make  in  what  is  going  to  be  a  long  stream  of deci­
sions   (about  clothing,  food,   etc.).  When   we   face   such   a   
decision,  it  might  seem  to  us  that  this  is  just  one  decision,  
without  large consequences; but  in fact the power  of the  first  
decision can  have  such  a long-lasting effect  that  it will perco­
late  into  our  future  decisions  for  years  to  come.  Given  this  
effect,  the  first  decision  is  crucial,  and  we  should  give  it  an  
appropriate  amount  of  attention.  
Socrates  said that  the unexamined  life  is not  worth  living.  
Perhaps  it's time to inventory  the imprints  and  anchors  in  our  
own  life.  Even  if they  once  were  completely  reasonable,  are  
they  still reasonable? Once the  old  choices are  reconsidered,  
*I am  not  claiming  that  spending  money  on  a wonderful  cup of coffee  every day, or  even  
a  few  times  a day,  is necessarily  a bad decision—I  am  saying  only  that  we  should  
question  our  decisions.  
44 

the   fallacy  of  supply   and  demand  
45 
we  can  open  ourselves  to  new  decisions—and  the  new  op­
portunities  of a new  day. That  seems to make  sense.  
ALL  THIS  TALK  about  anchors  and  goslings has  larger  impli­
cations   than   consumer   preferences,   however.   Traditional   
economics  assumes  that  prices of products  in  the  market  are  
determined  by  a  balance  between  two  forces:  production  at  
each  price  (supply)  and  the  desires  of those  with  purchasing  
power  at  each price  (demand). The  price  at  which  these  two  
forces  meet determines  the prices in the  marketplace.  
This  is an  elegant idea, but  it depends  centrally on  the  as­
sumption  that  the  two  forces  are  independent   and  that  to­
gether  they  produce  the  market  price. The  results  of  all  the  
experiments  presented  in  this  chapter  (and  the  basic idea of 
arbitrary  coherence itself)  challenge these assumptions. First, 
according  to  the  standard  economic framework,  consumers'  
willingness  to  pay  is  one  of  the  two  inputs  that   determine   
market  prices  (this  is  the  demand).  But  as  our  experiments  
demonstrate,  what  consumers  are willing to pay can easily be 
manipulated,   and  this  means  that  consumers  don't  in  fact  
have  a  good  handle  on  their  own  preferences  and  the  prices  
they  are willing to pay  for  different  goods  and experiences. 
Second,  whereas  the  standard   economic  framework   as­
sumes that  the forces of supply  and  demand  are  independent,  
the  type  of  anchoring  manipulations   we  have  shown   here   
suggest  that  they  are,  in  fact,  dependent.  In  the  real  world,  
anchoring comes from  manufacturer's  suggested  retail prices 
(MSRPs),  advertised  prices,  promotions,  product   introduc­
tions,  etc.—all of  which  are  supply-side  variables.  It  seems  
then  that  instead  of consumers'  willingness  to  pay  influenc­
ing market prices, the causality is somewhat  reversed and  it is 

predictably   irrational   
market  prices  themselves  that  influence  consumers'  willing­
ness to  pay. What  this  means  is that  demand  is not,  in fact,  a  
completely  separate  force from  supply.  
AND  THIS  IS  not  the  end of the  story. In the  framework  of ar­
bitrary  coherence, the  relationships  we  see in  the  marketplace  
between  demand  and  supply  (for  example,  buying  more  yo­
gurt when  it is discounted)  are based not on preferences but  on  
memory. Here is an illustration of this idea. Consider your cur­
rent  consumption  of  milk  and  wine.  Now  imagine  that  two  
new taxes will be introduced  tomorrow.  One will cut the price 
of  wine  by 50 percent,  and  the  other  will increase the  price of 
milk  by  100 percent.  What  do  you  think  will  happen?  These  
price changes will surely affect  consumption,  and  many  people  
will  walk  around  slightly  happier  and  with  less calcium. But 
now  imagine  this. What  if the  new  taxes  are  accompanied  by  
induced  amnesia  for  the  previous  prices  of  wine  and  milk?  
What  if the  prices change  in  the  same  way, but  you  do  not  re­
member what  you paid  for these two products  in the past? 
I  suspect  that  the  price  changes  would  make  a  huge  im­
pact  on  demand  if  people  remembered  the  previous  prices  
and  noticed  the  price increases; but  I also  suspect  that  with­
out  a memory  for past prices, these price changes would  have  
a  trivial  effect,  if any,  on  demand.  If people  had  no  memory  
of  past  prices, the  consumption  of milk  and  wine  would  re­
main  essentially  the  same,  as  if the  prices  had  not  changed.  
In  other  words,  the  sensitivity  we  show  to  price  changes  
might  in  fact  be largely  a result  of our  memory  for  the  prices  
we  have  paid  in  the  past  and  our  desire  for  coherence  with  
our  past  decisions—not  at  all  a  reflection of our  true  prefer­
ences or our  level of  demand.  
46 

the  fallacy  of   supply   and  demand  
47 
The  same  basic principle  would  also  apply  if  the  govern­
ment one day decided to impose a tax that  doubled  the price of 
gasoline. Under  conventional economic theory, this  should  cut  
demand.  But would  it? Certainly, people  would  initially com­
pare  the  new  prices with  their  anchor,  would  be  flabbergasted  
by  the  new  prices,  and  so  might  pull  back  on  their  gasoline  
consumption  and  maybe  even  get  a  hybrid  car.  But  over  the  
long run,  and  once consumers  readjusted  to  the  new  price  and  
the  new  anchors  (just  as we  adjust  to  the price of Nike  sneak­
ers, bottled water, and  everything else), our gasoline consump­
tion, at the new price, might in fact  get close to the pretax level. 
Moreover, much as in the example of Starbucks, this process of 
readjustment  could  be  accelerated if the  price  change  were  to  
also be accompanied  by other changes, such  as a new  grade of 
gas, or a new type of fuel  (such as corn-based ethanol  fuel).  
I  am  not  suggesting  that  doubling  the  price  of  gasoline  
would  have no effect  on consumers' demand.  But I do believe 
that  in the  long term,  it would  have  a much  smaller  influence  
on  demand  than  would  be  assumed  from  just  observing  the  
short-term  market  reactions to price increases. 
ANOTHER   IMPLICATION   OF  arbitrary  coherence  has  to  do  
with  the  claimed  benefits  of the  free  market  and  free  trade.  
The  basic idea  of the  free  market  is that  if I have  something  
that  you  value  more than  I do—let's  say  a sofa—trading  this  
item will benefit both of us. This means that  the  mutual  ben­
efit  of trading  rests  on  the  assumption  that  all the  players  in  
the market know  the value of what  they have and  the value of 
the things  they  are considering getting from  the  trade.  
But  if  our  choices  are  often   affected  by  random   initial   
anchors,  as  we  observed  in  our  experiments,  the  choices  and  

predictably   irrational   
trades  we  make  are  not  necessarily going to  be  an  accurate re­
flection of the real pleasure or utility we derive from  those  prod­
ucts.  In  other  words,  in  many  cases we  make  decisions  in  the  
marketplace that  may not  reflect how  much pleasure  we can get 
from  different  items. Now, if we can't accurately compute  these  
pleasure values, but  frequently  follow arbitrary  anchors instead, 
then  it  is not  clear that  the  opportunity  to  trade  is necessarily 
going to  make  us  better  off. For example, because of some  un­
fortunate  initial anchors  we  might  mistakenly  trade  something  
that  truly  gives  us  a  lot of pleasure  (but  regrettably  had  a  low  
initial anchor) for something that  gives us less pleasure  (but ow­
ing to some random  circumstances had  a high initial anchor). If 
anchors and  memories of these anchors—but  not preferences— 
determine  our  behavior, why would trading  be hailed as the key 
to maximizing personal  happiness  (utility) ? 
So,  WHERE  DOES  this  leave us? If we can't  rely on  the  market  
forces of supply  and  demand  to set optimal  market prices, and 
we  can't  count  on  free-market  mechanisms  to  help  us  maxi­
mize  our  utility, then  we  may  need  to  look  elsewhere. This is 
especially the case with society's essentials, such as health care, 
medicine,  water,  electricity, education,  and  other  critical  re­
sources. If you  accept the  premise  that  market  forces and  free  
markets  will not  always  regulate  the  market  for the  best,  then  
you  may  find  yourself among  those  who  believe that  the  gov­
ernment  (we  hope  a  reasonable  and  thoughtful   government)   
must  play  a  larger  role  in  regulating  some  market  activities,  
even  if this  limits  free  enterprise.  Yes, a  free  market  based  on  
supply,  demand,  and  no  friction  would  be the  ideal if we  were  
truly  rational.  Yet  when  we  are  not  rational  but  irrational,  
policies should  take this important  factor into account. 
48 

CHAPTER      3      
The    Cost of Zero Cost 
Why    We Often  Pay   Too Much    When    
We  Pay     Nothing     
H
ave  you  ever  grabbed  for  a  coupon  offering   a   FREE!   
package  of  coffee  beans—even  though  you  don't  drink  
coffee  and  don't  even  have  a machine  with  which  to  brew  it?  
What  about  all those  FREE!  extra  helpings  you  piled  on  your  
plate  at  a  buffet,   even  though  your   stomach  had   already   
started  to  ache  from  all  the  food  you  had  consumed?  And  
what  about  the  worthless  FREE!  stuff  you've  accumulated—  
the promotional  T-shirt from  the radio  station, the teddy bear 
that came with  the box of Valentine chocolates, the  magnetic  
calendar  your  insurance  agent  sends  you each year? 
It's   no  secret that  getting  something  free  feels  very  good.  
Zero  is not  just  another  price,  it  turns  out.  Zero  is  an  emo­
tional  hot  button—a  source of irrational  excitement. Would 
you  buy  something  if it  were  discounted  from  50 cents to 20 
cents? Maybe. Would you buy  it if it were discounted  from 50 
cents  to  two  cents? Maybe. Would  you  grab  it if it  were  dis­
counted  from  50 cents to  zero? You bet! 

predictably   irrational   
What  is it about  zero cost that  we  find  so irresistible? Why 
does  FREE!  make  us  so  happy?  After  all,  FREE!  can  lead  us  
into  trouble:  things  that  we would  never consider  purchasing  
become  incredibly  appealing  as  soon  as  they  are  FREE!  For  
instance,  have  you  ever  gathered  up  free  pencils, key  chains,  
and  notepads   at  a  conference,  even  though   you'd  have  to  
carry  them  home  and  would  only throw  most  of them  away?  
Have  you  ever  stood  in  line  for  a  very  long  time  (too  long),  
just  to  get  a  free  cone of Ben and  Jerry's ice cream? Or  have  
you  bought  two  of a  product  that  you  wouldn't  have  chosen  
in  the  first  place, just to  get the  third  one  for  free?  
ZERO   HAS  HAD  a long  history. The Babylonians invented  the  
concept  of  zero;  the  ancient  Greeks  debated  it  in  lofty  terms  
(how could something be nothing?); the ancient Indian  scholar  
Pingala  paired  zero  with  the  numeral  1 to  get  double  digits;  
and  both  the Mayans  and  the Romans  made  zero part of their 
numeral  systems. But zero really found  its place about AD  498,  
when  the  Indian   astronomer  Aryabhata   sat  up  in  bed  one  
morning  and  exclaimed,  "Sthanam    sthanam     dasa       gunam"—       
which  translates,  roughly,  as  "Place  to  place  in  10  times  in  
value." With  that,  the  idea of decimal-based  place-value  nota­
tion  was  born.  Now  zero  was  on  a  roll: It  spread  to  the  Arab  
world, where  it flourished;  crossed the Iberian Peninsula to Eu­
rope  (thanks  to  the  Spanish Moors)  ; got  some tweaking  from  
the  Italians;  and  eventually  sailed  the  Atlantic  to  the  New  
World, where  zero ultimately  found  plenty  of employment  (to­
gether  with  the  digit  1) in  a place called Silicon  Valley.  
So  much  for  a  brief  recounting  of the  history  of  zero. But 
the concept of zero applied  to money  is less clearly  understood.  
In  fact,  I don't  think  it even  has  a history.  Nonetheless,   FREE!   
50 

the   cost  of  zero  cost  
has  huge  implications,  extending  not  only  to  discount  prices  
and  promotions,  but  also to how  FREE!  can  be used  to  help  us  
make decisions that  would  benefit ourselves and society. 
If   FREE!  were  a  virus  or  a subatomic particle,  I might  use  
an  electron  microscope  to  probe  the  object  under  the  lens,  
stain  it  with  different   compounds   to  reveal  its  nature,  or  
somehow  slice  it apart  to  reveal  its inner  composition. In be­
havioral  economics we  use  a  different  instrument,  however,  
one that  allows  us to  slow down  human  behavior  and  exam­
ine it frame  by frame,  as it unfolds.  As you  have  undoubtedly  
guessed  by now, this procedure  is called an  experiment.  
IN   ONE  EXPERIMENT,  Kristina  Shampanier  (a PhD  student  at  
MIT),  Nina  Mazar  (a professor  at  the  University of Toronto), 
and  I went into the chocolate business. Well, sort of. We set up  a  
table  at   a  large  public  building   and   offered   two   kinds  of  
chocolates—Lindt  truffles  and  Hershey's  Kisses.  There  was  a  
large  sign  above  our  table  that  read,  "One  chocolate per  cus­
tomer." Once the potential customers stepped  closer, they could 
see  the two types of chocolate and their prices.* 
For  those of you who  are not chocolate connoisseurs, Lindt 
is produced  by a Swiss firm that  has  been  blending fine cocoas 
for  160 years. Lindt's chocolate truffles  are particularly  prized—  
exquisitely creamy and  just about  irresistible. They cost  about  
30  cents each when  we  buy them  in bulk.  Hershey's  Kisses,  on  
the other hand,  are good  little chocolates, but  let's face  it,  they  
are  rather  ordinary:  Hershey  cranks  out  80  million  Kisses a 
day.  In  Hershey,  Pennsylvania,  even  the  streetlamps  are  made  
in the shape of the ubiquitous  Hershey's  Kiss.  
*We  posted  the prices so  that  they  were  visible  only  when  people  got  close  to  the table. 
We  did  this  because we  wanted  to make sure that  we  did  not  attract  different  types  of  
people  in  the different  conditions—avoiding  what  is called  self-selection.  
51 

predictably   irrational   
So  what  happened  when  the  "customers"  flocked  to  our  
table? When  we set the price of a Lindt truffle  at  15 cents  and  
a  Kiss  at one cent, we were not  surprised  to  find that  our cus­
tomers  acted  with  a good  deal  of rationality:  they  compared  
the price and  quality of the  Kiss with  the price and  quality of 
the  truffle,  and  then  made  their  choice. About  73 percent of 
them  chose the  truffle  and 27 percent  chose a  Kiss.  
Now we decided to see how FREE!  might change the situation. 
So  we  offered  the  Lindt  truffle  for  14 cents and  the  Kisses free. 
Would there  be a  difference? Should there  be? After  all, we  had  
merely lowered the price of both kinds of chocolate by one cent. 
But  what  a difference  FREE!  made. The humble  Hershey's  
Kiss became a  big favorite. Some 69 percent of our  customers  
(up  from  27 percent  before)  chose the  FREE!  Kiss,  giving  up  
the  opportunity  to  get the  Lindt  truffle  for  a very  good price. 
Meanwhile, the Lindt truffle  took  a tumble; customers choos­
ing it decreased  from  73 to 31 percent. 
What was going on here? First of all,  let me say that there are 
many  times when  getting  FREE!  items can  make  perfect  sense.  
If  you  find  a bin of free athletic socks at  a department  store, for 
instance, there's no downside  to grabbing all the socks you can. 
The   critical  issue  arises  when   FREE!  becomes  a  struggle  be­
tween  a  free  item  and  another  item—a  struggle  in  which  the  
presence of FREE!  leads us to make a bad decision. For instance, 
imagine going to a sports  store to buy a pair of white socks, the 
kind  with  a nicely padded  heel and  a  gold toe. Fifteen  minutes  
later you're leaving the store, not with the socks you came in for, 
but with  a cheaper pair that you don't  like at all (without  a pad­
ded  heel and  gold toe) but that  came in a package with  a  FREE!  
second  pair.  This  is  a  case  in  which  you  gave  up  a  better  deal  
and  settled  for  something  that  was  not  what  you  wanted,  just  
because you were lured  by the  FREE!  
52 

the  cost  of  zero  cost  
To  replicate  this  experience  in  our  chocolate  experiment,  
we  told  our  customers  that  they  could  choose  only  a  single  
sweet—the  Kiss or the truffle.  It was an either-or decision, like 
choosing  one  kind  of athletic sock over  another.  That's  what  
made  the  customers'  reaction  to  the  FREE!  Kiss  so  dramatic:  
Both   chocolates  were  discounted   by  the   same  amount  of  
money.  The  relative  price  difference  between  the  two   was   
unchanged—and  so was the expected pleasure  from  both.  
According   to   standard   economic  theory   (simple  cost-
benefit  analysis), then,  the  price reduction  should  not  lead  to  
any change in the behavior of our customers. Before,  about 27 
percent  chose the  Kiss  and  73 percent  chose the  truffle.  And  
since  nothing  had  changed  in  relative  terms,  the  response  to  
the  price  reduction   should  have  been  exactly  the  same.  A  
passing  economist,  twirling  his  cane  and  espousing  conven­
tional  economic  theory,  in  fact,  would  have  said  that  since  
everything in the situation was the same, our customers  should  
have chosen the  truffles  by the  same margin  of preference.* 
And  yet here we were, with  people pressing  up to the  table  
to  grab  our  Hershey's  Kisses,  not  because  they  had  made  a  
reasoned  cost-benefit  analysis  before  elbowing  their  way  in,  
but  simply  because the  Kisses were  FREE!  HOW strange  (but  
predictable)  we humans  are!  
THIS   CONCLUSION,   INCIDENTALLY,  remained  the  same  in  
other experiments as well. In one case we priced the  Hershey's  
Kiss  at two  cents, one cent, and  zero cents, while pricing  the  
truffle  correspondingly  at  27  cents, 26  cents,  and  25  cents.  
*For  a more detailed  account of how  a rational consumer should  make decisions  in  these  
cases,  see  the appendix  to this  chapter.  
53 

predictably   irrational   
We   did  this  to  see if discounting  the  Kiss  from  two  cents  to  
one cent and  the truffle  from 27 cents to 26 cents would  make  
a  difference  in  the  proportion  of  buyers  for  each.  It  didn't.  
But,    once  again,  when  we  lowered  the  price  of  the  Kiss  to  
free,  the  reaction  was  dramatic.  The  shoppers  overwhelm­
ingly demanded  the  Kisses.  
We   decided that  perhaps  the experiment had  been  tainted,  
since  shoppers  may  not  feel  like  searching  for  change  in  a  
purse  or backpack, or they may not have any money on  them.  
Such  an  effect  would  artificially  make  the  free  offer   seem   
more  attractive. To  address  this  possibility, we  ran  other ex­
periments  at one of MIT's  cafeterias. In this setup, the  choco­
lates were displayed next to the cashier as one of the cafeteria's 
regular  promotions  and  the  students  who  were  interested  in  
the chocolates simply added them  to the  lunch purchase,  and  
paid  for  them  while  going  through  the  cashier's  line.  What  
happened?  The  students  still  went  overwhelmingly  for  the  
FREE!  option.  
WHAT  IS  IT about  FREE!  that's  so enticing? Why do  we  have  
an  irrational  urge  to  jump  for  a  FREE!  item,  even  when  it's  
not  what  we really  want?  
I  believe the  answer  is this. Most transactions  have  an  up­
side and  a downside,  but  when  something  is FREE!  we  forget  
the  downside,  FREE!  gives  us  such  an  emotional  charge  that  
we  perceive  what  is  being  offered  as  immensely  more  valu­
able  than  it  really  is. Why?  I think  it's  because  humans  are  
intrinsically  afraid  of loss. The  real  allure of FREE!  is tied  to  
this fear. There's no visible possibility of loss when  we choose 
a  FREE!  item  (it's free).  But suppose  we choose the  item  that's  
not    free.  Uh-oh,  now  there's  a  risk  of  having  made  a  poor  
54 

the   cost  of  zero  cost  
decision—the  possibility  of  a  loss. And  so,  given  the choice, 
we go for  what  is free. 
For  this  reason,  in  the  land  of pricing,  zero  is not  just  an­
other  price. Sure,  10 cents can  make  a  huge  difference  in  de­
mand   (suppose  you  were  selling  millions  of  barrels  of oil), 
but  nothing  beats  the  emotional  surge  of  FREE!  This,  the  
zero   price    effect,    is in  a category  all its  own.  
To  be  sure,  "buying  something  for  nothing"  is  a  bit  of  an  
oxymoron.  But  let  me  give you  an  example  of how  we  often  
fall  into  the trap of buying  something  we may not  want,  sim­
ply because of that  sticky substance,  FREE!  
I  recently  saw  a  newspaper   ad  from  a  major  electronics  
maker,  offering  me seven  FREE! DVD  titles if I purchased  the  
maker's  new  high-definition  DVD player.  First  of  all,  do  I  
need  a  high-definition   player  right  now?  Probably  not.  But  
even  if  I did,  wouldn't   it  be  wiser  to  wait  for  prices  to  de­
scend?  They  always  do—and   today's  $600   high-definition   
DVD    player  will  very  quickly  be  tomorrow's  $200  machine.  
Second, the DVD  maker  had  a clear agenda  behind  its  offer.  
This  company's  high-definition  DVD  system  is  in  cutthroat  
competition  with  Blu-Ray,  a  system  backed  by  many  other  
manufacturers.  Right  now,  Blu-Ray  is ahead  and  could  pos­
sibly  dominate  the  market.  So how  much  is  FREE!  when  the  
machine  being  offered  may  find  its  way  into  obsolescence  
(like Betamax VCRs)  ? Those  are  two  rational  thoughts  that  
might  prevent  us  from  falling  under  the  spell  of  FREE!  But,  
gee,  those  FREE!  DVDS  certainly  look  good!  
GETTING   SOMETHING    FREE!   is  certainly  a  draw  when   we   
talk about  prices. But what  would  happen  if the  offer  was  not  
a  free price, but  a free exchange? Are we as susceptible to  free  
55 

predictably   irrational   
products  as  we  are  to  getting  products  for  free?  A  few  years  
ago,  with  Halloween  drawing  near,  I had  an  idea  for  an ex­
periment  to  probe  that  question.  This  time  I wouldn't  even  
have to  leave my home to  get  my answers. 
Early  in  the  evening, Joey,  a  nine-year-old  kid  dressed  as  
Spider-Man  and  carrying  a  large  yellow  bag,  climbed  the  
stairs  of  our  front  porch.  His  mother  accompanied  him,  to  
ensure  that  no  one  gave her  kid  an  apple  with  a  razor  blade  
inside.  (By the way, there never was  a case of razor  blades be­
ing  distributed  in  apples  on  Halloween;  it  is  just  an  urban  
myth.)  She stayed  on  the  sidewalk, however, to  give Joey  the  
feeling that  he was trick-or-treating  by himself. 
After  the  traditional  query,  "Trick  or treat?" I asked Joey 
to  hold  open  his  right  hand.  I placed  three  Hershey's  Kisses  
in his palm  and  asked him  to  hold  them  there  for  a  moment.  
"You  can  also  get  one  of  these  two  Snickers bars,"  I  said,  
showing him  a small one and  a large one. "In fact,  if you give 
me one of those  Hershey's  Kisses  I will  give you  this smaller 
Snickers bar. And if you give me two of your Hershey's Kisses, 
I will give you this larger Snickers bar." 
Now   a  kid  may  dress  up  like  a  giant  spider,  but   that   
doesn't  mean  he's  stupid.  The  small  Snickers bar  weighed  
one  ounce,  and  the  large  Snickers bar  weighed  two  ounces.  
All Joey  had  to do was give me one additional  Hershey's  Kiss  
(about 0.16 ounce) and  he would  get an extra ounce of Snick­
ers. This deal  might  have  stumped  a rocket scientist, but  for  
a nine-year-old boy, the computation  was easy: he'd  get more 
than  six times the  return  on  investment  (in the  net  weight of 
chocolate)  if  he  went  for  the  larger  Snickers bar.  In  a  flash  
Joey  put  two of his Kisses into  my hand,  took the  two-ounce  
Snickers bar, and  dropped  it into his bag. 
Joey  wasn't  alone  in  making  this  snap  decision.  All  but  
56 

the    cost  of  zero  cost  
57 
one of the  kids  to  whom  I presented  this  offer  traded  in  two  
Kisses for  the  bigger candy  bars.  
Zoe    was  the  next  kid  to  walk  down  the  street.  She  was  
dressed  as  a  princess,  in  a  long  white  dress,  with  a  magic  
wand  in one hand  and  an orange Halloween pumpkin  bucket  
in  the  other.  Her  younger  sister  was  resting  comfortably  in  
their  father's  arms,  looking  cute  and  cuddly  in  her   bunny   
outfit.  As  they  approached,  Zoe  called  out,  in  a  high,  cute  
voice,  "Trick  or  treat!"  In  the  past  I admit  that  I have  some­
times devilishly replied, "Trick!" Most kids  stand  there,  baf­
fled,  having  never  thought  through  their  question  to  see  that  
it  allowed  an  alternative  answer.  
In  this  case I gave Zoe  her  treat—three  Hershey's  Kisses.  
But   I did  have  a trick  up  my sleeve. I offered  little Zoe  a deal: 
a  choice between  getting  a large Snickers bar  in exchange for 
one of her Hershey's  Kisses, or getting the  small Snickers bar 
for    FREE!  without  giving up  any Hershey's  Kisses.  
Now,  a  bit  of  rational  calculation  (which  in  Joey's  case  
was  amply  demonstrated)  would  show  that  the  best  deal  is  
to  forgo  the  free  small Snickers bar,  pay  the  cost of one  ad­
ditional  Hershey's  Kiss,  and  go  for  the  large  Snickers  bar.  
On  an  ounce-for-ounce  comparison,  it  was  far  better  to  
give  up  one  additional  Hershey's  Kiss  and  get  the  larger  
Snickers  bar  (two  ounces)  instead  of  a  smaller  Snickers bar 
(one    ounce). This  logic  was  perfectly  clear  to  Joe  and  the  
kids  who  encountered  the  condition  in which  both Snickers 
bars  had  a cost. But what  would  Zoe  do? Would  her  clever  
kid's  mind  make  that  rational  choice—or  would  the  fact  
that  the  small Snickers bar  was  FREE!  blind  her to the  ratio­
nally correct  answer?  
As   you  might  have  guessed  by  now,  Zoe,  and  the  other  
kids to whom  I offered  the same deal, was completely blinded 

predictably   irrational   
by   FREE!  About  70 percent  of them  gave  up  the  better  deal,  
and  took  the  worse  deal just because it was  FREE!  
Just  in  case you  think  Kristina, Nina,  and  I make  a  habit  
of  picking  on  kids,  I'll  mention  that  we  repeated  the  experi­
ment  with  bigger  kids,  in  fact  students  at  the MIT  student  
center. The  results  replicated  the  pattern  we  saw  on  Hallow­
een. Indeed,  the draw of zero cost is not  limited to  monetary  
transactions.  Whether  it's  products  or  money,  we  just  can't  
resist the  gravitational  pull  of  FREE!  
So   DO  YOU think  you  have  a handle  on  FREE!?  
OK.   Here's  a  quiz.  Suppose  I  offered  you  a  choice  be­
tween  a  free  $10 Amazon  gift  certificate and  a $20 gift  cer­
tificate  for  seven  dollars.  Think  quickly. Which  would  you  
take? 
If  you  jumped  for  the  FREE!  certificate, you  would  have  
been  like most  of the  people  we tested  at  one of the  malls  in  
Boston. But look again:  a $20 gift  certificate for  seven  dollars  
delivers  a $13 profit.  That's  clearly better  than  getting  a $10 
certificate  free  (earning  $10).  Can  you  see the  irrational  be­
havior  in action ? * 
LET  ME TELL  you  a  story  that  describes the  real  influence of 
FREE!  on our behavior. A few years ago, Amazon.com  started  
offering  free  shipping of orders  over a certain amount.  Some­
one  who  purchased  a  single  book  for  $16.95  might  pay  an  
additional   $3.95  for  shipping,  for  instance.  But  if  the  cus-
*We  also  conducted the experiment offering  the  $10  gift  certificate for one  dollar and 
the   $20  certificate for eight  dollars. This  time  most  of the participants jumped  for  the  
$20  certificate.  
58 

the   cost  of  zero   cost   
tomer bought  another  book, for  a total of $31.90, they  would  
get  their  shipping   FREE!   
Some  of the  purchasers  probably  didn't  want  the  second  
book  (and  I  am  talking  here  from  personal  experience)  but  
the  FREE!  shipping  was  so  tempting  that  to  get  it, they  were  
willing to pay the cost of the extra book. The people  at Ama­
zon  were  very  happy  with  this  offer,  but  they  noticed  that  in  
one  place—France—there  was  no  increase  in  sales.  Is  the  
French consumer  more rational  than  the  rest of us? Unlikely. 
Rather,  it turned  out,  the  French customers  were  reacting  to  
a  different  deal.  
Here's what  happened.  Instead of offering  FREE!  shipping  
on  orders  over  a  certain  amount,  the  French  division  priced  
the  shipping  for  those  orders  at  one  franc.  Just  one  franc—  
about  20 cents. This doesn't  seem  very  different  from   FREE!   
but  it was.  In  fact,  when  Amazon  changed  the  promotion  in  
France  to  include  free  shipping,  France  joined  all  the  other  
countries   in   a   dramatic   sales   increase.   In   other   words,   
whereas  shipping  for  one  franc—a  real  bargain—was  virtu­
ally  ignored  by the  French,  FREE!  shipping  caused  an  enthu­
siastic  response.  
America  Online  (AOL) had  a  similar  experience  several  
years  ago  when  it  switched  from  pay-per-hour   service  to  a  
monthly  payment  schedule  (in  which  you  could  log  in  as  
many  hours  as you  wanted  for  a  fixed  $19.95  per  month).  In  
preparation  for  the  new  price  structure,  AOL geared  up  for  
what   it  estimated  would   be  a  small  increase  in   demand.   
What  did   it  get?  An  overnight  increase  from   140,000   to   
236,000  customers  logging  into  the  system,  and  a  doubling  
of  the  average  time  online.  That  may  seem  good—but   it   
wasn't good. AOL's customers encountered  busy phone lines, 
and  soon AOL was forced to lease services from  other  online  
59 

predictably   irrational   
providers   (who  were  only  too  happy  to  sell  bandwidth   to   
AOL—at  the  premium   of  snow  shovels  in  a  snowstorm).  
What  Bob Pittman  (the president  of AOL at  the  time)  didn't  
realize  was  that  consumers  would  respond  to  the  allure  of  
FREE!  like starving  people  at  a  buffet.  
WHEN   CHOOSING   BETWEEN  two  products,  then,  we  often  
overreact to  the  free  one. We might  opt  for  a  FREE!  checking  
account  (with no benefits attached)  rather  than  one that costs 
five  dollars  a  month.  But if the  five-dollar  checking  account  
includes  free  traveler's  checks,  online  billing,  etc.,  and  the  
FREE!  one  doesn't,  we  may  end  up  spending  more  for  this  
package  of  services  with  the   FREE!  account  than  with  the  
five-dollar   account.  Similarly, we  might  choose  a  mortgage  
with  no closing costs, but  with  interest  rates  and  fees that  are  
off  the wall; and  we might  get a product  we don't  really  want  
simply  because  it comes with  a  free  gift.  
My   most  recent  personal  encounter  with  this  involved  a  
car.  When  I was looking for  a new car a few years ago, I knew 
that  I really  should  buy  a  minivan.  In  fact,  I had  read  up  on  
Honda  minivans  and  knew  all about  them.  But then  an  Audi  
caught  my eye, at  first through  an  appealing  offer—FREE!  oil  
changes for  the next  three  years. How  could  I resist? 
To  be perfectly  honest,  the  Audi  was  sporty  and  red,  and  
I was still resisting the idea of being a mature  and  responsible  
father  to  two  young  kids.  It  wasn't  as  if the  free  oil  change  
completely  swayed  me,  but  its  influence  on  me  was,  from  a  
rational  perspective,  unjustifiably  large. Just  because  it  was  
FREE!  it served  as an  additional  allure  that  I could cling to. 
So  I bought  the  Audi—and  the  FREE!  oil.  (A few  months  
later,  while  I  was  driving  on   a  highway,  the   transmission   
60 

the  cost  of  zero   cost   
broke—but  that  is a different  story.) Of course, with  a cooler 
head  I  might  have  made  a  more  rational  calculation.  I  drive  
about  7,000  miles  a  year;  the  oil  needs  to  be  changed  every  
10,000 miles; and the cost per change is about  $75. Over  three  
years, then,  I would  save about  $150,  or  about  0.5 percent of 
the  purchase  price of the  car—not  a  good  reason  to  base  my  
decision on.  It gets worse, though:  now  I have  an  Audi  that  is  
packed to the ceiling with  action figures, a stroller, a bike, and 
other kids' paraphernalia.  Oh, for  a  minivan.  
THE   CONCEPT  OF  zero  also  applies  to  time.  Time  spent  on  
one  activity, after  all, is time taken  away  from  another.  So if 
we  spend  45 minutes  in  a  line  waiting  for  our  turn  to  get  a  
FREE!  taste  of ice cream,  or  if we  spend  half  an  hour  filling  
out  a long form  for  a tiny  rebate, there  is something  else  that  
we are not  doing  with  our  time.  
My  favorite  personal  example  is  free-entrance  day  at  a  
museum.  Despite  the  fact  that  most  museums  are  not  very  
expensive,  I find  it  much  more  appealing  to  satisfy  my  desire  
for  art  when  the price is zero. Of course I am not  alone in this 
desire.  So  on  these  days  I  usually  find  that  the  museum  is  
overcrowded,  the  line  is long,  it  is hard  to  see anything,  and  
fighting  the  crowds  around  the  museum  and  in  the  cafeteria  
is unpleasant.  Do  I realize that  it  is  a mistake  to  go to  a  mu­
seum  when  it is free?  You bet  I do—but  I go nevertheless. 
ZERO  MAY ALSO  affect  food  purchases. Food  manufacturers  
have  to  convey  all  kinds  of  information  on  the  side  of  the  
box. They have to tell us about  the calories, fat content,  fiber,  
etc.  Is  it  possible  that  the  same  attraction  we  have  to  zero  
61 

predictably   irrational   
price  could  also  apply  to  zero  calories, zero  trans  fats,  zero  
carbs,  etc.?  If  the  same  general  rules  apply,  Pepsi  will  sell  
more cans if the  label says "zero calories" than  if it says  "one  
calorie." 
Suppose  you  are  at  a  bar,  enjoying  a  conversation  with  
some friends. With one brand  you  get a calorie-free beer,  and  
with  another  you  get  a  three-calorie  beer. Which  brand  will  
make  you  feel  that  you  are  drinking  a really light  beer? Even 
though  the difference between  the two  beers is negligible, the 
zero-calorie  beer  will  increase  the  feeling  that  you're  doing  
the  right  thing,  healthwise. You might  even  feel  so good  that  
you  go ahead  and  order  a plate of fries. 
So    YOU    CAN  maintain  the status  quo with  a 20-cent fee  (as in 
the  case of Amazon's  shipping  in  France),  or  you  can  start  a  
stampede  by  offering  something  FREE!  Think  how  powerful  
that  idea  is! Zero  is not  just  another  discount.  Zero  is  a  dif­
ferent  place. The  difference  between  two  cents  and  one  cent  
is   small.  But  the  difference  between  one  cent  and  zero  is  
huge! 
If  you  are  in  business,  and  understand   that,  you  can  do  
some marvelous  things. Want to draw  a crowd? Make some­
thing  FREE!  Want  to  sell  more  products?  Make  part  of  the  
purchase   FREE!   
Similarly,  we  can  use  FREE!  to  drive  social policy.  Want  
people to drive electric cars? Don't  just lower the  registration  
and  inspection  fees—eliminate  them,  so  that  you  have  cre­
ated  FREE!  In  the  same  way,  if health  is your  concern,  focus  
on  early  detection  as  a  way  to  eliminate  the  progression  of  
severe illnesses. Want  people  to  do  the  right  thing—in  terms  
of   getting  regular  colonoscopies, mammograms,  cholesterol  
62 

the    cost  of  zero  cost  
checks,  diabetes  checks,  and  such?  Don't  just  decrease  the  
cost  (by  decreasing  the  co-pay). Make  these  critical  proce­
dures  FREE!  
I  don't  think  most  policy  strategists  realize  that  FREE!  is  
an  ace  in  their  hand,  let  alone know  how  to  play  it.  It's cer­
tainly  counterintuitive,  in  these  times of budget  cutbacks, to 
make  something  FREE!  But  when  we  stop  to  think  about  it,  
FREE!  can  have  a  great  deal  of power,  and  it  makes  a  lot of 
sense. 
63 

predictably   irrational   
APPENDIX:  CHAPTER    3    
Let  me  explain  how  the  logic  of  standard  economic theory 
would  apply to our setting. When  a person  can select one and 
only  one of two  chocolates, he needs  to  consider not  the  ab­
solute value of each chocolate but  its relative value—what  he  
gets  and  what  he  gives  up.  As  a  first  step  the  rational  con­
sumer  needs  to  compute  the  relative  net  benefits  of the  two  
chocolates  (the  value  of the  expected  taste  minus  the  cost),  
and  make  a decision based on which chocolate has the larger 
net  benefit. How  would  this  look when  the  cost of the  Lindt  
truffle  was  15 cents and the cost of the Hershey's Kiss was one 
cent? The  rational  consumer  would  estimate  the  amount of 
pleasure  he expects to  get from  the  truffle  and  the  Kiss  (let's  
say  this  is 50 pleasure  units  and  five  pleasure  units,  respec­
tively)  and  subtract  the displeasure  he would  get from  paying  
15 cents and one cent (let's say this is 15 displeasure units  and  
one  displeasure  unit,  respectively). This  would  give  him  a  
total  expected pleasure  of 35 pleasure  units  (50-15)  for  the  
truffle,  and  a  total  expected  pleasure  of  four  pleasure  units  
(5-1)  for  the  Kiss.  The  truffle  leads  by 31 points,  so  it's  an  
easy choice—the truffle  wins hands  down.  
What  about  the case when  the cost is reduced  by the  same  
amount  for  both  products?  (Truffles  cost  14 cents  and  the  
Kiss is free.) The same logic applies. The taste of the chocolates 
has  not  changed,  so  the  rational  consumer  would  estimate  
the  pleasure  to  be  50  and  five  pleasure  units,  respectively.  
What   has  changed  is  the  displeasure.  In  this  setting  the  
rational consumer would  have a lower level of displeasure  for  
both  chocolates because the prices have been reduced  by one 
cent  (and  one  displeasure  unit). Here  is the  main  point:  be­
cause  both  products  were  discounted  by  the  same  amount,  
their  relative  difference  would  be  unchanged.  The  total  ex-
64 

the  cost  of   zero   cost   
pected  pleasure  for  the  truffle   would  now  be  36  pleasure  
units  (50-14),  and  the  total  expected  pleasure  for  the  Kiss  
would  now  be five pleasure  units  (5-0).  The  truffle  leads  by  
the  same 31 points,  so it should  be the  same easy choice. The 
truffle  wins  hands  down.  
This  is how  the  pattern  of choice should    look, if the  only  
forces  at  play  were  those  of  a  rational  cost-benefit  analysis.  
The  fact that  the  results  from  our  experiments  are  so  differ­
ent  tells  us  loud  and  clear  that  something  else  is  going  on,  
and  that  the  price  of  zero  plays  a  unique  role  in  our  deci­
sions. 
65 



CHAPTER      4      
The  Cost of Social  Norms  
Why   We Are  Happy   to  Do  Things,    but  Not  
When   We Are  Paid   to  Do    Them    
ou  are  at  your  mother-in-law's  house  for  Thanksgiving  
_L  dinner,  and  what  a sumptuous  spread  she has put  on  the  
table  for  you! The  turkey  is roasted  to  a  golden  brown;  the  
stuffing  is homemade  and  exactly the  way  you  like  it.  Your  
kids  are  delighted:  the  sweet  potatoes  are  crowned   with   
marshmallows. And your  wife is flattered: her favorite recipe 
for  pumpkin pie has  been chosen for  dessert.  
The  festivities continue into the late afternoon. You loosen 
your  belt  and  sip  a  glass  of wine.  Gazing  fondly  across  the  
table at your mother-in-law, you rise to your feet and  pull  out  
your wallet. "Mom, for  all the  love you've put  into this,  how  
much  do  I owe you?" you  say  sincerely. As  silence descends 
on the gathering, you  wave  a handful  of bills. "Do you  think  
three  hundred  dollars  will do  it? No,  wait,  I should  give you 
four  hundred!"  
This  is not  a  picture  that  Norman  Rockwell would  have  
painted.  A glass of wine falls over; your mother-in-law  stands  

predictably   irrational   
up  red-faced;  your  sister-in-law  shoots  you  an  angry  look;  
and  your  niece  bursts  into  tears.  Next  year's  Thanksgiving  
celebration,  it  seems, may  be  a  frozen  dinner  in  front  of  the  
television  set.  
WHAT'S   GOING  ON  here? Why  does  an  offer  for  direct  pay­
ment  put  such  a  damper  on  the  party?  As  Margaret  Clark,  
Judson  Mills,  and  Alan  Fiske  suggested  a  long time  ago, the 
answer is that we live simultaneously in two different  worlds—  
one  where  social norms  prevail, and  the  other  where  market  
norms  make  the  rules. The social norms  include the  friendly  
requests that people make of one another. Could you help me 
move this couch? Could  you  help  me change this tire? Social 
norms  are wrapped  up  in  our  social nature  and  our  need  for  
community.  They  are  usually  warm  and  fuzzy.  Instant  pay­
backs  are  not  required:  you  may  help  move  your  neighbor's  
couch,  but  this  doesn't  mean  he  has  to  come  right  over  and  
move yours. It's like opening  a door  for  someone: it  provides  
pleasure  for  both  of you,  and  reciprocity is not  immediately  
required. 
The  second world,  the  one  governed  by market  norms,  is  
very different. There's nothing  warm  and  fuzzy  about  it. The 
exchanges are sharp-edged:  wages, prices, rents, interest, and 
costs-and-benefits.  Such market  relationships  are  not neces­
sarily  evil  or  mean—in  fact,  they  also  include self-reliance, 
inventiveness, and  individualism—but  they  do  imply compa­
rable  benefits  and  prompt  payments.  When  you  are  in  the  
domain  of market  norms,  you  get  what  you  pay  for—that's  
just  the  way  it is. 
When  we  keep  social norms  and  market  norms  on  their  
separate  paths,  life  hums  along pretty  well. Take sex, for  in-
68 

the  cost  of  social  norms  
stance. We may  have  it free  in  the  social context, where  it is, 
we hope,  warm  and  emotionally nourishing.  But there's  also  
market  sex,  sex  that  is  on  demand   and  that  costs  money.  
This  seems pretty  straightforward.  We don't  have  husbands  
(or  wives)  coming  home  asking  for  a  $50 trick;  nor  do  we  
have prostitutes  hoping  for  everlasting love. 
When  social  and  market  norms  collide,  trouble  sets  in.  
Take sex again. A guy takes  a girl out  for dinner  and  a movie, 
and  he pays the bills. They go out  again, and  he pays the bills 
once  more. They go  out  a third  time, and  he's  still  springing  
for  the meal and  the entertainment.  At this point,  he's  hoping  
for  at  least  a  passionate  kiss  at  the  front  door.  His  wallet  is  
getting  perilously  thin,  but  worse  is  what's  going  on  in  his  
head:  he's having  trouble  reconciling the  social norm  (court­
ship)  with  the  market  norm  (money  for  sex). On  the  fourth  
date  he casually mentions  how  much  this  romance  is costing 
him.  Now  he's  crossed  the  line.  Violation! She  calls  him  a  
beast  and  storms  off.  He  should  have  known  that  one  can't  
mix social and  market  norms—especially in this case—with­
out  implying  that  the  lady  is  a  tramp.  He  should  also  have  
remembered the immortal words of Woody Allen: "The most 
expensive sex is free sex." 
A  FEW  YEARS  ago, James Heyman  (a professor  at  the  Univer­
sity of St. Thomas)  and  I decided  to  explore the  effects of so­
cial and  market norms.  Simulating the Thanksgiving  incident  
would  have  been  wonderful,  but  considering  the  damage  we  
might  have done  to  our  participants'  family  relationships,  we  
chose  something  more  mundane.  In  fact,  it  was  one  of  the  
most  boring tasks  we  could  find  (there  is a tradition  in social 
science of using very boring tasks). 
69 

predictably   irrational   
In  this  experiment,  a  circle  was  presented  on  the  left  side  
of  a  computer  screen  and  a  box  was  presented  on  the  right.  
The  task  was  to  drag  the  circle,  using  the  computer  mouse,  
onto  the  square.  Once the  circle  was  successfully dragged  to  
the  square,  it  disappeared  from  the  screen  and  a  new  circle  
appeared  at  the  starting  point.  We asked  the  participants  to  
drag  as  many  circles  as  they  could,  and  we  measured  how  
many  circles they  dragged  within  five minutes. This was  our  
measure  of  their  labor  output—the  effort  that  they  would  
put  into this  task.  
How  could  this  setup  shed  light  on  social and  market ex­
changes?  Some  of  the  participants  received  five  dollars  for  
participating  in  the  short  experiment.  They  were  given  the  
money  as they walked into the lab; and  they were told that  at  
the  end  of  the  five  minutes,  the  computer  would  alert  them  
that  the  task  was done,  at  which point  they  were to  leave the 
lab. Because we paid  them  for their efforts, we expected them 
to  apply  market  norms to this situation  and  act accordingly. 
Participants  in  a  second  group  were  presented  with  the  
same  basic  instructions  and  task;  but  for  them  the  reward  
was  much  lower  (50 cents in  one experiment  and  10 cents in 
the other). Again  we expected the participants  to  apply  mar­
ket norms  to this  situation  and  act accordingly. 
Finally,  we had  a third  group,  to whom  we introduced  the  
tasks  as  a  social request.  We didn't  offer  the  participants  in  
this  group  anything  concrete  in  return  for  their  effort;  nor  
did  we mention  money. It was merely a favor that  we asked of 
them.  We expected these  participants  to  apply  social norms 
to the  situation  and  act accordingly. 
How  hard  did  the  different  groups  work? In  line with  the  
ethos   of  market   norms,   those   who   received   five  dollars  
dragged  on  average  159 circles,  and  those  who  received 50 
70 

the   cost  of  social  norms  
cents  dragged   on   average   101  circles.  As  expected,  more  
money  caused  our  participants  to  be  more  motivated   and   
work  harder  (by about 50 percent). 
What  about  the  condition  with  no  money?  Did  these  
participants  work  less than  the  ones  who  got  the  low  mon­
etary  payment—or,  in  the  absence of money, did  they  apply  
social  norms  to  the  situation  and  work  harder?  The  results  
showed that  on  average they dragged  168 circles, much  more  
than  those  who  were  paid  50 cents,  and  just  slightly  more  
than  those  who  were  paid  five dollars.  In  other  words,  our  
participants  worked  harder  under  the  nonmonetary  social  
norms  than  for  the  almighty  buck  (OK, 50 cents). 
Perhaps  we  should  have  anticipated  this. There  are  many  
examples to show that  people will work  more for  a cause  than  
for  cash. A few years ago, for instance, the AARP asked  some  
lawyers  if  they  would  offer  less  expensive  services  to  needy  
retirees,  at  something  like $30 an  hour.  The  lawyers  said  no.  
Then  the program  manager  from  AARP had  a brilliant  idea:  
he asked the  lawyers if they would  offer  free  services to  needy  
retirees. Overwhelmingly, the lawyers  said yes. 
What  was going on  here? How  could zero dollars  be  more  
attractive  than  $30?  When  money  was  mentioned,  the  law­
yers used  market  norms  and  found  the  offer  lacking, relative 
to  their  market  salary. When  no  money  was  mentioned  they  
used  social norms  and  were  willing  to  volunteer  their  time.  
Why  didn't  they  just  accept  the  $30, thinking  of  themselves  
as volunteers  who  received $30?  Because once market  norms  
enter our  considerations, the  social norms  depart.  
A  similar  lesson  was  learned  by  Nachum  Sicherman,  an  
economics  professor  at  Columbia,  who  was  taking  martial  
arts  lessons in Japan. The sensei  (the master teacher) was  not  
charging  the  group  for  the  training.  The  students,  feeling  
71 

predictably  irrational  
that  this was unfair,  approached  the master one day  and  sug­
gested that they pay him for his time and  effort. Setting down 
his  bamboo   shinai,    the   master  calmly  replied  that   if  he  
charged  them,  they would  not  be able to  afford  him.  
IN  THE  PREVIOUS  experiment,  then,  those  who  got  paid  50  
cents didn't  say to themselves, "Good for me; I get to do  this  
favor  for these researchers, and  I am  getting some money  out  
of  this,"  and  continue  to  work  harder  than  those  who  were  
paid  nothing.  Instead  they  switched  themselves  over  to  the  
market   norms,   decided   that   50  cents  wasn't   much,   and   
worked   halfheartedly.   In  other   words,   when   the   market   
norms  entered  the lab, the social norms  were pushed  out.  
But what  would happen  if we replaced the payments with a 
gift?  Surely your mother-in-law would  accept a good bottle of 
wine  at  dinner.  Or  how  about  a housewarming  present  (such  
as  an  eco-friendly  plant)  for  a  friend?  Are  gifts  methods of 
exchange  that  keep  us  within  the  social  exchange  norms?  
Would  participants  receiving such  gifts  switch  out  of the  so­
cial  norms  and  into  market  norms, or would  offering  gifts  as  
rewards  maintain  the participants  in the social world? 
To  find  out  just where  gifts  fall  on  the  line between social 
and  market  norms,  James  and  I  decided  on  a  new  experi­
ment.  This time,  we  didn't  offer  our  participants  money  for  
dragging  circles  across  a  computer  screen; we  offered  them  
gifts  instead. We replaced the 50-cent  reward  with  a Snickers 
bar  (worth  about 50 cents), and  the  five-dollar incentive with 
a box of Godiva chocolates (worth  about  five dollars). 
The participants came to the lab, got their reward,  worked  
as much  as they liked, and  left. Then we looked at the results. 
As it turned  out, all three experimental groups  worked  about  
72 

the  cost  of   social   norms   
equally hard during the task, regardless  of whether  they  got  a  
small Snickers bar  (these participants  dragged  on  average 162 
circles),  the  Godiva  chocolates  (these  participants   dragged   
on  average  169 circles),  or  nothing  at  all  (these  participants  
dragged  on  average  168 circles).  The  conclusion:  no  one  is  
offended  by  a  small  gift,  because  even  small  gifts  keep  us  in  
the  social exchange world  and  away  from  market  norms.  
BUT  WHAT  WOULD  HAPPEN  if we  mixed  the  signals  for  the  
two  types  of norms?  What  would  happen  if we  blended  the  
market  norm  with  the  social norm? In other words,  if we  said  
that  we would  give them  a  "50-cent    Snickers bar"  or  a    "five-
dollar    box  of  Godiva  chocolates,"  what  would  the  partici­
pants do ? Would a "50-cent Snickers bar" make our  participants  
work  as hard  as  a "Snickers bar"  made  them  work;  or  would  
it make  them  work  halfheartedly,  as the 50-cents made  them  
work?  Or  would  it  be  somewhere  in  the  middle?  The  next  
experiment  tested  these  ideas.  
As  it  turned  out,  the  participants  were  not  motivated  to  
work  at  all  when  they  got  the  50-cent  Snickers  bar,  and  in  
fact  the  effort  they  invested  was  the  same  as  when  they  got  a  
payment  of 50 cents. They reacted to the explicitly priced  gift  
in exactly the way they  reacted to cash, and  the  gift  no  longer  
invoked  social norms—by  the  mention  of its cost, the  gift  had  
passed  into  the  realm  of market  norms.  
By  the  way,  we  replicated  the  setup  later  when  we  asked  
passersby  whether  they  would  help  us  unload  a  sofa  from  a  
truck.  We found  the  same  results.  People  are  willing to  work  
free,  and  they  are  willing to  work  for  a reasonable  wage;  but  
offer  them  just  a  small  payment  and  they  will  walk  away.  
Gifts  are  also  effective  for  sofas,  and  offering  people  a  gift,  
73 

predictably   irrational   
*This  general procedure is  called priming, and  the unscrambling task  is  used  to  get  
participants  to  think  about  a particular  topic—without  direct instructions to do  so.  
74 
even  a  small  one,  is  sufficient  to  get  them  to  help;  but  men­
tion what  the  gift cost you, and  you  will see the back of them 
faster  than  you can  say market  norms.  
THESE  RESULTS  SHOW that  for  market  norms  to emerge, it is 
sufficient  to  mention  money  (even  when  no  money  changes  
hands).  But,  of  course,  market  norms   are  not  just   about   
effort—they  relate  to  a  broad  range  of  behaviors,  including  
self-reliance,  helping,  and  individualism.  Would  simply  get­
ting  people  to  think  about  money  influence  them  to  behave  
differently  in  these  respects? This premise  was  explored  in  a  
set of fantastic experiments  by Kathleen Vohs  (a professor  at  
the  University  of Minnesota), Nicole Mead  (a  graduate  stu­
dent   at  Florida  State  University),  and  Miranda   Goode  (a  
graduate  student  at the  University of British Columbia). 
They  asked  the  participants  in  their  experiments  to  com­
plete a "scrambled-sentence task," that  is, to rearrange  sets of 
words  to  form  sentences. For  the  participants  in  one  group,  
the  task  was  based  on  neutral  sentences  (for  example,  "It's  
cold  outside");  for  the  other  group,  the  task  was  based  on  
sentences  or  phrases  related  to  money  (for  example,  "High-
paying  salary"*). Would  thinking  about  money  in  this  man­
ner  be sufficient  to change the  way participants  behave?  
In  one  of  the  experiments,  the  participants   finished  the  
unscrambling  task  and  were  then  given  a  difficult  puzzle,  in  
which  they  had  to  arrange  12 disks  into  a  square.  As the ex­
perimenter  left  the  room,  he told  them  that  they  could  come  
to  him  if they  needed  any  help. Who  do  you  think  asked  for  

the  cost  of  social  norms  
help  sooner—those  who  had  worked  on  the  "salary"  sen­
tences, with  their implicit suggestion of money; or those  who  
had  worked  on  the  "neutral"  sentences,  about  the  weather  
and  other  such topics? As it turned  out,  the students  who  had  
first  worked  on  the  "salary"  task  struggled  with  the  puzzle  
for  about   five  and   a  half  minutes  before  asking  for  help,  
whereas those who had  first worked  on the neutral  task  asked  
for  help  after  about  three  minutes.  Thinking  about  money,  
then,  made  the  participants  in  the  "salary"  group  more  self-
reliant  and  less willing to  ask for  help.  
But  these  participants  were  also  less  willing  to  help  oth­
ers.  In  fact,  after  thinking  about  money  these  participants  
were  less  willing  to  help  an  experimenter  enter  data,  less  
likely  to  assist  another  participant   who  seemed   confused,   
and  less  likely to  help  a  "stranger"  (an  experimenter  in  dis­
guise)  who  "accidentally" spilled  a box of pencils. 
Overall,  the  participants   in  the  "salary"  group   showed   
many  of  the  characteristics  of  the  market:  they  were  more  
selfish and self-reliant; they wanted  to spend more time alone; 
they  were  more  likely to  select tasks  that  required  individual  
input  rather  than  teamwork;  and  when  they  were  deciding  
where  they  wanted  to  sit, they  chose seats farther  away  from  
whomever  they  were told to work  with.  Indeed,  just  thinking  
about  money makes  us behave as most economists believe we 
behave—and  less like the  social animals  we  are  in  our  daily  
lives. 
This  leads  me to  a  final  thought:  when  you're  in  a  restau­
rant  with  a date,  for  heaven's  sake don't  mention  the price of 
the  selections. Yes, they're  printed  clearly on  the  menu. Yes, 
this  might  be  an  opportunity  to  impress  your  date  with  the  
caliber  of the  restaurant.  But if you  rub  it in,  you'll  be likely 
to shift  your relationship  from  the social to the market  norm.  
75 

predictably   irrational   
Yes,  your  date  may  fail  to  recognize  how  much  this  meal  is  
setting  you  back. Yes, your  mother-in-law  may  assume  that  
the bottle of wine you've presented  is a $10 blend, when  it's a 
$60  special reserve  merlot. That's  the  price  you  have  to  pay,  
though,  to  keep  your  relationships  in  the  social domain  and  
away  from  market  norms.  
So  WE  LIVE  in  two  worlds:  one  characterized  by  social ex­
changes  and  the  other  characterized  by  market  exchanges.  
And  we  apply  different  norms  to these two  kinds  of relation­
ships.  Moreover,  introducing  market  norms  into  social ex­
changes, as we have seen, violates the  social norms  and  hurts  
the  relationships.  Once  this  type  of  mistake  has  been  com­
mitted,   recovering  a  social  relationship   is  difficult.   Once   
you've  offered  to pay  for the  delightful  Thanksgiving  dinner,  
your  mother-in-law  will  remember  the  incident  for  years  to  
come. And if you've ever offered  a potential romantic  partner  
the  chance to  cut  to  the  chase, split  the  cost of the  courting  
process, and  simply go to bed, the odds are that you will have 
wrecked the  romance  forever.  
My  good  friends  Uri  Gneezy  (a professor  at  the  University  
of  California at San Diego)  and Aldo Rustichini  (a professor  at  
the  University  of  Minnesota)  provided  a  very  clever  test of 
the long-term  effects of a switch from  social to market  norms.  
A few years ago, they  studied  a day care center in Israel to 
determine  whether  imposing  a  fine  on  parents  who  arrived  
late to  pick  up  their  children  was  a  useful  deterrent.  Uri  and  
Aldo  concluded  that  the  fine  didn't  work  well, and  in  fact  it  
had  long-term  negative  effects.  Why? Before  the  fine  was  in­
troduced,  the teachers and parents  had  a social contract, with 
social norms  about  being late. Thus, if parents  were late—as 
76 

the  cost  of   social   norms   
they  occasionally were—they  felt  guilty  about  it—and  their  
guilt  compelled  them  to  be  more  prompt  in  picking  up  their  
kids  in  the  future.   (In  Israel,  guilt  seems  to  be  an  effective  
way  to  get  compliance.) But once  the  fine  was  imposed,  the  
day  care  center  had  inadvertently  replaced  the  social  norms  
with  market  norms.  Now  that  the  parents  were  paying    for    
their tardiness, they interpreted  the situation  in terms of mar­
ket  norms.  In  other  words,  since they  were  being  fined,  they  
could  decide  for  themselves  whether  to  be  late  or  not,  and  
they frequently  chose to be late. Needless to  say, this was  not  
what  the  day  care center  intended.  
BUT  THE  REAL  story  only  started  here. The  most  interesting  
part  occurred  a  few  weeks  later,  when  the  day  care center re­
moved  the  fine. Now  the  center  was  back to  the  social  norm.  
Would the parents  also return to the social norm ? Would their 
guilt return as well? Not  at all. Once the  fine was removed, the 
behavior of the parents  didn't change. They continued  to pick 
up  their  kids  late.  In  fact,  when  the  fine  was  removed,  there  
was  a slight increase in the number  of tardy  pickups  (after all, 
both  the social norms  and  the  fine had  been removed). 
This  experiment  illustrates  an  unfortunate  fact:  when  a so­
cial  norm  collides with  a  market  norm,  the  social norm  goes  
away for a long time. In other words, social relationships are not 
easy to reestablish. Once the  bloom  is off the rose—once a so­
cial norm  is trumped  by a market norm—it  will rarely return. 
THE  FACT  THAT we live in both  the social world  and  the  mar­
ket world  has  many  implications for our  personal  lives. From 
time to time, we all need someone to help us move something, 
77 

predictably   irrational   
or  to  watch  our  kids  for  a  few  hours,  or  to  take  in  our  mail  
when  we're out of town. What's the best way to motivate  our  
friends  and  neighbors  to  help  us? Would  cash  do  it—a  gift,  
perhaps? How  much? Or nothing  at all? This social dance, as 
I'm  sure  you  know,  isn't  easy to  figure  out—especially  when  
there's  a risk of pushing a relationship  into the realm of a  mar­
ket exchange. 
Here  are  some  answers.  Asking  a  friend  to  help  move  a  
large  piece of  furniture  or  a  few  boxes  is  fine.  But  asking  a  
friend  to  help  move  a  lot of boxes or  furniture  is  not—espe­
cially  if the  friend  is working  side  by  side  with  movers  who  
are  getting  paid  for  the  same  task.  In  this  case,  your  friend  
might  begin  to  feel  that  he's  being  used.  Similarly,  asking  
your  neighbor  (who happens to  be  a lawyer)  to  bring  in  your  
mail while you're on vacation  is  fine. But asking him to  spend  
the  same  amount   of  time  preparing  a  rental  contract  for  
you—free—is  not.  
THE  DELICATE  BALANCE  between  social and  market  norms is 
also  evident  in  the  business  world.  In  the  last  few  decades  
companies    have   tried    to    market    themselves    as   social   
companions—that  is, they'd  like us to think  that they and  we  
are family, or at least are friends  who  live on the same cul-de-
sac.  "Like  a good neighbor, State Farm  is there"  is one famil­
iar slogan. Another  is Home Depot's gentle urging:  "You can 
do  it. We can  help."  
Whoever started  the movement to treat customers socially 
had  a great idea. If customers and  a company  are family, then 
the company  gets several benefits. Loyalty is paramount. Mi­
nor  infractions—screwing  up  your  bill  and  even  imposing  a  
modest  hike  in  your  insurance  rates—are   accommodated.   
78 

the  cost  of  social  norms  
Relationships  of  course  have  ups  and  downs,   but   overall   
they're  a pretty  good  thing.  
But  here's  what  I  find  strange:  although  companies  have  
poured  billions of dollars  into  marketing  and  advertising  to  
create  social relationships—or  at  least  an  impression  of so­
cial  relationships—they  don't  seem to  understand  the  nature  
of  a social relationship,  and  in particular  its risks. 
For   example,  what   happens   when   a  customer's  check  
bounces?  If the  relationship  is  based  on  market  norms,  the  
bank  charges  a fee, and  the  customer  shakes  it  off. Business 
is business. While the  fee is annoying,  it's nonetheless accept­
able. In a social relationship, however, a hefty late fee—rather 
than  a  friendly  call  from  the  manager  or  an  automatic  fee  
waiver—is  not  only  a  relationship-killer;  it's  a  stab  in  the  
back. Consumers will take personal  offense. They'll leave the 
bank  angry  and  spend  hours  complaining  to  their   friends   
about  this  awful   bank.  After  all,  this  was   a   relationship   
framed  as  a  social exchange. No  matter  how  many  cookies,  
slogans, and  tokens of friendship  a bank  provides,  one viola­
tion  of the  social exchange means  that  the  consumer  is back 
to the  market  exchange. It can happen that  quickly.  
What's  the  upshot?  If you're  a  company,  my  advice  is  to  
remember  that  you  can't  have  it  both  ways.  You can't  treat  
your  customers  like family  one  moment  and  then  treat  them  
impersonally—or, even worse, as a nuisance or a competitor— 
a moment  later when  this becomes more convenient or  profit­
able. This is not how  social relationships work. If you want  a  
social  relationship,  go  for  it,  but  remember  that  you  have  to  
maintain  it under  all circumstances. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  you  think  you  may  have  to  play  
tough  from  time  to time—charging  extra  for  additional  ser­
vices  or  rapping  knuckles  swiftly  to  keep  the  consumers  in  
79 

predictably   irrational   
line—you  might  not  want  to  waste  money  in  the  first  place  
on  making  your  company  the  fuzzy  feel-good choice.  In  that  
case,  stick to  a  simple  value proposition:  state  what  you  give  
and  what  you  expect  in  return.  Since  you're  not  setting  up  
any   social  norms   or  expectations,  you   also  can't  violate  
any—after  all, it's just business. 
COMPANIES   HAVE  ALSO  tried  to  establish  social norms  with  
their  employees.  It  wasn't  always  this  way.  Years  ago,  the  
workforce  of  America  was  more  of  an  industrial,   market-
driven  exchange. Back  then  it was  often  a nine-to-five, time-
clock  kind  of  mentality.  You  put  in  your  40  hours  and  you  
got  your  paycheck on  Friday. Since  workers  were paid  by  the  
hour,  they  knew  exactly  when  they  were  working  for  the  
man,  and  when  they  weren't.  The  factory  whistle  blew  (or  
the corporate  equivalent took place), and  the transaction  was  
finished.  This  was  a  clear  market  exchange,  and  it  worked  
adequately  for  both  sides.  
Today  companies  see  an  advantage  in  creating  a  social  
exchange.  After  all,  in  today's  market  we're  the  makers  of  
intangibles. Creativity counts more than  industrial  machines.  
The partition  between  work  and  leisure has likewise  blurred.  
The  people  who  run  the  workplace  want  us  to  think  about  
work while we're driving home and  while we're in the  shower.  
They've  given  us  laptops,  cell  phones,  and  BlackBerries  to  
bridge  the  gap  between  the workplace  and  home.  
Further  blurring  the  nine-to-five  workday  is  the  trend  in  
many  companies to  move away  from  hourly  rates to  monthly  
pay. In this 24/7 work  environment  social norms  have  a great 
advantage:  they  tend  to  make  employees  passionate,  hard­
working,  flexible,  and  concerned. In  a market  where  employ-
So 

the  cost  of  social   norms   
ees'  loyalty  to  their  employers  is  often  wilting,  social  norms  
are  one  of  the  best  ways  to  make  workers  loyal,  as  well  as  
motivated. 
Open-source software  shows the potential of social norms. 
In the case of Linux and  other collaborative projects, you  can  
post  a problem  about  a bug on one of the  bulletin  boards  and  
see  how  fast  someone,  or  often  many  people,  will  react  to  
your  request  and  fix  the  software—using  their  own  leisure  
time. Could  you  pay  for  this  level of service? Most likely. But 
if  you  had  to hire people of the  same caliber they  would  cost  
you  an  arm  and  a  leg.  Rather,  people  in  these  communities  
are happy to give their time to society at large  (for which  they  
get  the  same  social benefits  we  all  get  from  helping  a  friend  
paint  a room). What can we learn  from  this that  is applicable 
to the  business world? There are social rewards that  strongly  
motivate  behavior—and  one  of  the  least  used  in  corporate  
life  is the encouragement  of social rewards and  reputation.  
IN  TREATING  THEIR  EMPLOYEES—much as  in  treating  their  
customers—companies  must  understand  their  implied  long-
term  commitment.  If  employees  promise  to  work  harder  to  
achieve an  important  deadline  (even canceling family obliga­
tions  for  it), if they  are  asked  to  get  on  an  airplane  at  a  mo­
ment's   notice   to   attend   a   meeting,   then   they   must   get   
something  similar  in  return—something   like  support  when  
they  are  sick, or  a  chance  to  hold  on  to  their  jobs  when  the  
market  threatens  to take their  jobs  away.  
Although  some  companies  have  been  successful  in  creat­
ing  social  norms  with  their  workers,  the  current  obsession  
with  short-term  profits,  outsourcing,  and  draconian  cost cut­
ting threatens  to  undermine  it all. In  a social exchange,  after  
81 

predictably   irrational   
all,  people believe that  if something goes awry the other  party  
will  be  there  for  them,  to  protect  and  help  them.  These be­
liefs  are  not  spelled  out  in  a  contract,  but  they  are  general  
obligations to provide  care and  help  in times of need. 
Again, companies cannot  have it both  ways. In  particular,  
I   am   worried   that   the   recent  cuts   we   see  in  employees'  
benefits—child  care, pensions,  flextime, exercise rooms,  the  
cafeteria,  family  picnics, etc.—are  likely  to  come  at  the  ex­
pense  of  the  social  exchange  and  thus  affect  workers'  pro­
ductivity.  I am  particularly  worried  that  cuts  and  changes  in  
medical benefits are likely to transform  much of the employer-
employee social relationship  to  a market  relationship.  
If companies want  to benefit from  the advantages  of social 
norms, they need to do a better job of cultivating those norms. 
Medical  benefits,  and  in  particular  comprehensive  medical  
coverage, are among the  best ways  a company  can express its 
side  of  the  social  exchange.  But  what  are  many  companies  
doing?  They  are  demanding  high  deductibles  in  their  insur­
ance  plans,  and  at  the  same  time  are  reducing  the  scope of 
benefits.  Simply  put,  they  are  undermining   the  social  con­
tract  between  the  company  and  the  employees and  replacing  
it  with  market  norms.  As companies  tilt  the  board,  and  em­
ployees slide from  social norms to the realm of market  norms,  
can  we  blame them  for  jumping  ship  when  a better  offer  ap­
pears? It's really no surprise  that  "corporate loyalty," in  terms  
of  the  loyalty  of  employees  to  their  companies,  has  become  
an  oxymoron.  
Organizations  can also think  consciously about  how  peo­
ple  react  to  social  and  market  norms.  Should  you  give  an  
employee  a  gift  worth   $1,000  or  pay  him  or  her  an  extra  
$1,000  in  cash? Which  is  better?  If  you  ask  the  employees,  
the  majority  will most  likely prefer  cash over the gift. But the 
82 

the  cost  of  social  norms  
gift  has  its value, though  this  is sometimes ill  understood—it  
can  provide  a  boost  to  the  social  relationship  between  the  
employer  and  the  employee,  and  by  doing  so  provide  long-
term  benefits  to  everyone. Think  of it  this  way:  who  do  you  
suppose   is  likely  to  work  harder,   show  more  loyalty,  and  
truly  love his work  more—someone who  is getting $1,000  in  
cash or someone who  is getting  a personal  gift?  
Of  course, a gift  is a symbolic gesture. And  to  be sure,  no  
one  is  going  to  work  for  gifts  rather  than  a  salary.  For  that  
matter,  no  one  is going  to  work  for  nothing.  But if you  look  
at companies like Google, which  offers  a wide variety of ben­
efits  for  employees  (including  free  gourmet  lunches), you  can  
see  how  much  goodwill  is created  by emphasizing  the social 
side of the company-worker  relationship. It's remarkable  how  
much  work  companies  (particularly  start-ups)  can  get out of 
people when  social norms  (such as the excitement of  building  
something together)  are stronger than  market  norms  (such as 
salaries stepping  up  with  each promotion). 
If  corporations  started  thinking  in terms  of social norms, 
they would  realize that  these norms  build  loyalty  and—more  
important—make  people  want  to  extend  themselves  to  the  
degree  that   corporations   need  today:   to  be  flexible,  con­
cerned, and  willing to pitch  in. That's what  a social relation­
ship  delivers.  
THIS   QUESTION  OF  social norms  in  the  workplace  is one  we  
should  be thinking  about  frequently.  America's  productivity  
depends  increasingly on  the  talent  and  efforts  of its  workers.  
Could  it  be  that  we  are  driving  business  from  the  realm  of  
social  norms  into  market  norms?  Are  workers  thinking  in  
terms  of money,  rather  than  the  social values  of loyalty  and  
83 

predictably   irrational   
trust? What will that  do to American productivity  in the  long  
run,  in terms of creativity and  commitment? And what  of the 
"social contract" between government  and the citizen? Is that 
at  risk  as well? 
At  some  level  we  all  know  the  answers.  We  understand,  
for  instance, that  a  salary  alone  will  not  motivate  people  to  
risk  their  lives.  Police  officers,   firefighters,   soldiers—they   
don't  die for their  weekly pay. It's the  social norms—pride  in  
their profession  and  a sense of duty—that will motivate  them  
to  give  up  their  lives and  health.  A  friend  of mine  in  Miami  
once  accompanied  a  U.S. customs  agent  on  a  patrol  of  the  
offshore  waters. The  agent  carried  an  assault  rifle  and  could  
certainly have pounded  several holes into  a fleeing drug boat. 
But had  he ever done  so? No  way, he replied. He wasn't  about  
to get himself  killed for the government  salary  he received. In 
fact,  he confided, his group  had  an  unspoken  agreement  with  
the  drug  couriers:  the  feds  wouldn't  fire  if the  drug  dealers  
didn't  fire.  Perhaps  that's  why  we  rarely  (if ever)  hear  about  
gun  battles on the  edges of America's "war  on  drugs."  
How  could we change this situation? First, we could  make  
the  federal  salary  so  good  that  the  customs  agent  would  be  
willing  to  risk  his  life  for  it.  But  how  much  money  is  that?  
Compensation  equal  to  what  the  typical  drug  trafficker  gets  
for  racing  a boat  from  the Bahamas to Miami? Alternatively, 
we could elevate the  social norm,  making  the  officer  feel  that  
his  mission  is worth  more  than  his base pay—that  we  honor  
him  (as we honor  our  police and  firefighters)  for  a job which 
not  only  stabilizes the  structure  of society but  also  saves  our  
kids  from  all kinds  of dangers.  That  would  take  some  inspi­
rational  leadership, of course, but  it could  be  done.  
Let  me  describe  how  that  same  thought   applies  to  the  
world  of education.  I recently joined  a  federal  committee  on  
84 

the  cost  of  social  norms  
85 
incentives and  accountability in public education. This is one 
aspect  of  social  and  market  norms  that  I  would  like  to  ex­
plore  in the years to come. Our  task  is to reexamine the  "No  
Child  Left  Behind" policy, and  to  help  find  ways  to  motivate  
students,  teachers, administrators,  and  parents.  
My   feeling   so   far   is   that   standardized    testing    and    
performance-based  salaries are likely to push education  from  
social  norms  to  market  norms.  The  United  States  already  
spends  more money per  student  than  any other Western  soci­
ety.  Would  it  be  wise  to  add  more  money? The  same  con­
sideration  applies  to  testing:  we  are  already  testing  very  
frequently,  and  more  testing  is unlikely  to  improve  the  qual­
ity of education. 
I suspect that  one answer  lies in the realm of social norms. 
As we learned  in our  experiments, cash will take you  only  so  
far—social  norms  are  the  forces  that  can  make  a  difference  
in the long run.  Instead of focusing the attention  of the teach­
ers,  parents,  and  kids  on  test  scores, salaries,  and  competi­
tion, it might be better to instill in all of us a sense of purpose, 
mission, and  pride in education. To do this we certainly can't 
take the path of market  norms. The Beatles proclaimed  some  
time ago that  you "Can't  Buy Me Love"  and  this  also  applies  
to  the  love of learning—you  can't  buy  it; and  if you  try,  you  
might  chase it  away.  
So how can we improve the educational system? We should 
probably  first rethink  school curricula, and  link them  in more 
obvious  ways  to  social  goals  (elimination  of  poverty   and   
crime,  elevation  of  human  rights,  etc.),  technological  goals  
(boosting energy  conservation,  space exploration,  nanotech-
nology,  etc.),  and  medical  goals  (cures  for  cancer,  diabetes,  
obesity,  etc.)  that  we  care  about  as  a  society. This  way  the  
students,  teachers, and  parents  might  see the  larger  point  in  

predictably   irrational   
education  and become more enthusiastic and  motivated  about  
it. We should  also work  hard  on  making  education  a  goal  in  
itself, and  stop confusing  the number of hours  students  spend  
in school with  the  quality of the education  they  get. Kids can 
get excited about  many  things  (baseball, for example), and  it  
is our  challenge  as  a  society to  make  them  want  to  know  as  
much  about  Nobel  laureates  as  they  now  know  about  base­
ball players. I am not  suggesting that  igniting  a social passion 
for  education  is  simple;  but  if  we  succeed  in  doing  so,  the  
value could  be immense. 
MONEY,   AS   IT  turns  out,  is  very  often  the  most  expensive  
way  to  motivate  people.  Social  norms  are  not  only  cheaper,  
but  often  more  effective as well. 
So  what  good  is  money?  In  ancient  times,  money  made  
trading  easier: you didn't have to sling a goose over your back 
when  you  went  to  market,  or  decide  what  section  of  the  
goose  was  equivalent  to  a  head  of lettuce.  In  modern  times  
money  has  even  more  benefits,  as  it  allows  us  to  specialize,  
borrow,  and  save.  
But  money  has  also taken  on  a  life  of its own.  As we  have  
seen,  it  can  remove  the  best  in  human  interactions. So do  we  
need money? Of course we do. But could there be some aspects 
of  our  life that  would  be, in some ways, better without  it?  
That's  a radical idea, and  not  an  easy one to imagine. But 
a  few years  ago  I had  a taste of it. At that  time, I got  a  phone  
call  from  John  Perry  Barlow, a  former  lyricist for  the  Grate­
ful  Dead,  inviting  me  to  an  event  that  proved  to  be  both  an  
important  personal  experience and  an  interesting  exercise in 
creating  a  moneyless  society. Barlow  told  me  that  I  had  to  
come  to  Burning Man  with  him,  and  that  if  I  did,  I  would  
86 

the   cost  of  social  norms  
feel  as if I had  come home. Burning Man  is an  annual  week-
long  event  of  self-expression  and  self-reliance  held  in  Black  
Rock   Desert,   Nevada,   regularly   attended   by   more   than   
40,000  people. Burning Man  started  in  1986  on  Baker  Beach  
in  San  Francisco, when  a  small  crowd  designed,  built,  and  
eventually  set  fire  to  an  eight-foot  wooden  statue  of  a  man  
and  a smaller wooden  dog.  Since then  the  size of the man  be­
ing burned  and  the  number  of people  who  attend  the  festivi­
ties  has  grown  considerably, and  the  event  is now  one of  the  
largest art  festivals, and  an ongoing experiment  in  temporary  
community. 
Burning Man  has  many  extraordinary  aspects, but  for  me  
one of the  most  remarkable  is its rejection of market  norms.  
Money  is  not  accepted  at  Burning  Man.  Rather,  the  whole  
place  works  as  a  gift  exchange economy—you  give things  to  
other  people,  with   the  understanding   that   they  will  give  
something  back to  you  (or to  someone  else)  at  some point  in  
the future.  Thus, people who  can cook might  fix a meal. Psy­
chologists  offer  free  counseling  sessions. Masseuses  massage  
those  lying on  tables  before them.  Those who  have water  of­
fer   showers.  People  give  away  drinks,  homemade  jewelry,  
and  hugs.  (I made  some  puzzles  at  the  hobby  shop  at MIT, 
and  gave  them  to  people.  Mostly,  people  enjoyed  trying  to  
solve them.) 
At  first  this  was  all  very  strange,  but  before  long  I  found  
myself  adopting  the  norms  of Burning Man.  I was  surprised,  
in  fact,  to  find  that  Burning  Man  was  the  most  accepting,  
social,  and  caring place  I had  ever been.  I'm  not  sure  I could 
easily  survive  in  Burning Man  for  all  52 weeks  of  the  year.  
But  this  experience  has  convinced  me  that   life  with  fewer  
market  norms  and  more social norms  would  be more  satisfy­
ing, creative, fulfilling,  and  fun.  
87 

predictably   irrational   
The  answer,  I believe, is not  to  re-create society as Burn­
ing Man,  but  to  remember  that  social norms  can  play  a  far  
greater  role in  society than  we  have  been  giving them  credit  
for.  If  we  contemplate  how  market  norms  have  gradually  
taken  over our  lives in the past  few decades—with  their  em­
phasis on higher salaries, more income, and more  spending—  
we  may  recognize  that  a  return  to  some  of  the  old  social  
norms  might  not  be  so  bad  after  all.  In  fact,  it  might  bring  
quite  a  bit of the  old civility back to our lives. 
88 

CHAPTER      5      
The  Influence of Arousal 
Why  Hot  Is  Much   Hotter   Than   We   Realize   
sk  most twentysomething male college students  whether  
_L^-they  would  ever  attempt  unprotected  sex  and  they  will  
quickly  recite  chapter  and  verse  about  the  risk  of  dreaded  
diseases   and   pregnancy.   Ask   them   in   any   dispassionate   
circumstances—while  they  are  doing  homework  or  listening  
to  a  lecture—whether  they'd  enjoy  being  spanked,  or  enjoy  
sex  in  a threesome  with  another  man,  and  they'll wince. No 
way, they'd  tell you. Furthermore, they'd  narrow  their eyes at 
you  and  think,  What  kind  of  sicko are  you  anyhow,  asking  
these questions in the  first place? 
In  2001, while  I  was  visiting  Berkeley  for  the  year,  my  
friend,   academic  hero,  and   longtime  collaborator  George  
Loewenstein  and  I  invited  a  few  bright  students  to  help  us  
understand  the  degree  to  which  rational,  intelligent  people  
can  predict  how  their  attitudes  will change when  they  are  in  
an  impassioned  state.  In  order  to  make  this  study  realistic,  
we needed  to  measure  the participants'  responses while  they  

predictably   irrational   
were smack in the midst of such an emotional state. We could 
have  made  our  participants  feel  angry  or  hungry,   frustrated   
or annoyed. But we preferred  to have them experience a pleas­
urable  emotion.  
We chose to study decision making under sexual arousal— 
not  because  we  had  kinky  predilections  ourselves,  but  be­
cause understanding  the impact of arousal  on behavior  might  
help  society grapple  with  some of its most  difficult  problems,  
such  as  teen  pregnancy  and  the  spread  of HIV-AIDS.  There  
are  sexual  motivations  everywhere  we  look,  and  yet  we  un­
derstand  very  little  about  how  these  influence  our  decision  
making. 
Moreover,  since  we  wanted  to  understand   whether  par­
ticipants  would  be  able to predict  how  they  would  behave  in  
a  particular  emotional  state,  the  emotion  needed  to  be  one  
that  was  already  quite familiar  to them. That  made  our deci­
sion  easy. If there's  anything  predictable  and  familiar  about  
twentysomething   male  college  students,   it's  the   regularity   
with  which  they experience sexual  arousal.  
ROY,  AN  AFFABLE,  studious  biology major  at  Berkeley,  is in  a  
sweat—and  not  over  finals. Propped  up  in the single bed of his 
darkened  dorm  room,  he's masturbating  rapidly  with  his  right  
hand.  With  his  left,  he's  using  a  one-handed  keyboard  to  ma­
nipulate  a Saran-wrapped  laptop computer. As he idles  through  
pictures  of  buxom  naked  women  lolling  around   in  various  
erotic poses, his heart pounds ever more loudly  in his chest. 
As   he   becomes   increasingly   excited,  Roy   adjusts   the   
"arousal meter" on the computer screen upward. As he reaches 
the  bright  red  "high"  zone, a question  pops  up  on  the screen: 
Could  you  enjoy sex with  someone you  hated?  
90 

the  influence   of   arousal   
Roy  moves  his  left  hand  to  a  scale that  ranges  from  "no"  
to  "yes"  and  taps  his  answer.  The  next  question   appears:   
"Would  you  slip  a woman  a drug to increase the  chance  that  
she would  have sex with you?" 
Again,  Roy  selects his  answer,  and  a  new  question  pops  
up.  "Would  you  always  use  a condom?" 
BERKELEY   ITSELF   IS  a  dichotomous  place.  It  was  a  site of 
antiestablishment  riots  in  the  1960s,  and  people  in  the  Bay  
Area  snarkily  refer  to  the  famously  left-of-center  city  as  the  
"People's  Republic of  Berkeley."  But  the  large  campus   itself   
draws  a  surprisingly  conformist  population  of top-level  stu­
dents.  In  a  survey  of incoming  freshmen  in  2004,  only 51.2 
percent  of the  respondents  thought  of  themselves  as  liberal.  
More than  one-third  (36 percent) deemed their views  middle-
of-the-road,  and  12 percent  claimed  to  be  conservatives. To 
my surprise,  when  I arrived  at  Berkeley,  I found  that  the  stu­
dents  were  in  general  not  very  wild,  rebellious,  or  likely  to  
take risks. 
The  ads  we  posted  around  Sproul  Plaza  read  as  follows:  
"Wanted: Male research participants, heterosexual,  18 years-
plus,  for  a  study  on  decision  making  and  arousal."  The  ad  
noted that  the experimental sessions would  demand  about  an  
hour  of the participants'  time, that  the participants  would  be  
paid  $10 per  session, and  that  the  experiments  could  involve  
sexually   arousing   material.  Those  interested   in   applying   
could  respond  to Mike,  the  research  assistant,  by e-mail. 
For  this  study,  we  decided  to  seek out  only  men.  In  terms  
of  sex, their wiring  is a lot simpler than  that  of women  (as we 
concluded  after  much  discussion  among  ourselves  and  our  
assistants,  both  male  and  female).  A  copy  of  Playboy    and  a  
91 

predictably   irrational   
darkened  room  were  about  all we'd  need  for  a high  degree of 
success. 
Another concern was getting the project approved  at MIT's 
Sloan  School  of Management  (where  I  had  my  primary  ap­
pointment) . This was  an  ordeal  in  itself. Before  allowing  the  
research  to  begin,  Dean  Richard  Schmalensee  assigned  a  
committee, consisting mostly of women, to examine the proj­
ect.  This committee  had  several concerns. What  if a  partici­
pant  uncovered   repressed   memories  of  sexual  abuse  as  a  
result of the research? Suppose  a participant  found  that  he or 
she was  a sex addict? Their questions  seemed unwarranted  to  
me,  since any  college student  with  a  computer  and  an  Inter­
net connection can get hold of the most graphic  pornography  
imaginable. 
Although  the  business school was  stymied  by this project, 
I was fortunate  to have a position  at MIT's Media Lab as well, 
and  Walter Bender, who  was  the  head  of the lab, happily  ap­
proved  the project. I was  on  my way. But my experience with 
MIT's  Sloan  School  made  it  clear  that  even  half  a  century  
after  Kinsey,  and  despite  its  substantial  importance,  sex  is  
still  largely  a taboo  subject  for  a  study—at  least  at  some  in­
stitutions. 
IN  ANY  CASE,  our  ads went  out;  and,  college men  being  what  
they  are,  we  soon  had  a  long  list of hearty  fellows  awaiting  
the chance to participate—including  Roy.  
Roy,  in  fact,  was  typical  of most  of the 25 participants  in  
our  study.  Born  and  raised  in  San Francisco, he  was  accom­
plished,  intelligent, and  kind—the  type  of kid  every prospec­
tive  mother-in-law  dreams  of. Roy  played  Chopin  études  on  
the piano  and  liked to dance to techno  music. He  had  earned  
92 

the  influence   of   arousal   
straight  A's throughout  high  school, where  he was  captain of 
the varsity  volleyball team. He  sympathized  with  libertarians  
and  tended  to  vote Republican. Friendly  and  amiable, he  had  
a steady girlfriend who he'd been dating for a year. He  planned  
to   go  to   medical   school  and   had   a   weakness   for   spicy   
California-roll  sushi  and  for the  salads  at Cafe Intermezzo. 
Roy  met  with  our  student   research  assistant,  Mike,  at  
Strada   coffee   shop—Berkeley's  patio-style   percolator   for   
many  an  intellectual thought,  including  the  idea  for the  solu­
tion  to  Fermat's  last  theorem.  Mike  was  slender  and  tall,  
with  short  hair,  an  artistic air, and  an  engaging smile. 
Mike shook hands with  Roy, and  they  sat down.  "Thanks  
for  answering  our  ad,  Roy," Mike  said,  pulling  out  a  few  
sheets of paper  and  placing them  on  the table. "First, let's go 
over the consent  forms."  
Mike intoned  the ritual  decree: The study  was about deci­
sion making  and  sexual arousal. Participation was  voluntary.  
Data  would  be  confidential.  Participants  had  the  right  to  
contact  the  committee  in  charge  of protecting  the  rights  of  
those participating  in experiments, and  so  on.  
Roy  nodded  and  nodded.  You couldn't  find  a more  agree­
able  participant.  
"You  can  stop  the  experiment  at  any  time,"  Mike  con­
cluded.  "Everything  understood?"  
"Yes,"  Roy  said.  He  grabbed   a  pen  and   signed.  Mike  
shook  his  hand.  
"Great!"  Mike  took   a  cloth  bag  out  of  his  knapsack.  
"Here's  what's  going  to  happen."  He  unwrapped  an  Apple  
iBook  computer  and  opened  it  up.  In  addition  to  the  stan­
dard keyboard, Roy saw  a  12-key  multicolored  keypad.  
"It's   a  specially  equipped   computer,"  Mike  explained.  
"Please  use  only  this  keypad  to  respond."  He  touched  the  
93 

predictably   irrational   
keys on  the  colored pad.  "We'll give you  a code to  enter,  and  
this  code  will  let  you  start  the  experiment.  During  the  ses­
sion,  you'll  be  asked  a  series  of  questions  to  which  you  can  
answer  on  a scale ranging  between 'no' and  'yes.' If you  think  
you  would  like the  activity described  in the  question,  answer  
'yes,'  and  if you  think  you  would  not,  answer  'no.' Remem­
ber that  you're  being asked to predict  how  you would  behave  
and  what  kind of activities you would  like when  aroused."  
Roy  nodded.  
"We'll  ask you to  sit in your  bed,  and  set the  computer  up  
on  a chair on the left  side of your bed, in clear sight and  reach  
of  your bed," Mike went on. "Place the keypad next to you so 
that  you  can  use  it without  any  difficulty,  and  be  sure  you're  
alone." 
Roy's  eyes twinkled  a little. 
"When  you  finish  with  the  session, e-mail  me and  we will 
meet again,  and  you'll get your  ten  bucks."  
Mike  didn't  tell Roy about  the  questions  themselves. The 
session started  by asking Roy to imagine that  he was sexually 
aroused,  and  to  answer  all  the  questions  as  he  would  if  he  
were aroused.  One  set of questions  asked  about  about  sexual  
preferences.   Would   he,  for  example,   find  women's   shoes   
erotic?  Could  he  imagine  being  attracted  to  a  50-year-old  
woman?  Could  it  be  fun  to  have  sex with  someone  who  was  
extremely  fat?  Could  having  sex  with  someone  he  hated  be  
enjoyable?  Would  it  be  fun  to  get  tied  up  or  to  tie  someone  
else up?  Could  "just kissing" be  frustrating?  
A  second  set  of  questions  asked  about  the  likelihood of 
engaging in immoral  behaviors such  as date  rape. Would Roy 
tell  a woman  that  he loved her to increase the chance that  she  
would  have  sex  with  him?  Would  he  encourage  a  date  to  
drink  to  increase  the  chance  that  she  would  have  sex  with  
94 

the  influence   of  arousal  
him? Would  he keep  trying  to  have  sex after  a  date  had  said  
"no"? 
A  third  set  of  questions  asked  about  Roy's likelihood of 
engaging  in  behaviors  related  to  unsafe  sex. Does  a  condom  
decrease  sexual  pleasure?  Would  he  always  use  a  condom if 
he  didn't  know  the  sexual  history  of  a  new  sexual  partner?  
Would  he  use  a condom  even if he  was  afraid  that  a  woman  
might  change her mind  while he went  to  get  it?*  
A  few  days  later,  having  answered  the  questions  in  his  
"cold," rational  state, Roy met  again  with Mike. 
"Those  were some interesting questions," Roy noted. 
"Yes,  I know," Mike  said  coolly. "Kinsey had  nothing  on  
us. By the  way, we have another  set of experimental sessions. 
Would  you  be interested  in participating  again?"  
Roy  smiled  a little, shrugged,  and  nodded.  
Mike  shoved  a  few  pages  toward  him.  "This  time  we're  
asking  you  to  sign  the  same  consent  form,  but  the  next  task  
will  be slightly different.  The next  session will be very  much  
the  same  as  the  last  one,  but  this  time  we  want  you  to  get  
yourself  into  an  excited  state  by  viewing  a  set  of  arousing  
pictures  and masturbating.  What we want  you to do is arouse 
yourself  to  a  high  level, but  not  to  ejaculate. In  case you  do,  
though,  the computer  will be  protected."  
Mike  pulled  out  the  Apple iBook. This time the  keyboard  
and  the  screen were  covered with  a thin  layer of Saran  wrap.  
Roy  made  a  face.  "I  didn't  know  computers  could  get  
pregnant." 
"Not  a  chance," Mike  laughed.  "This  one  had  its  tubes  
tied. But we like to keep them clean." 
Mike  explained  that  Roy  would  browse  through  a  series  
*For  a complete  lists  of the questions  we  asked,  see  the appendix to  this  chapter.  
95 

predictably   irrational   
of  erotic pictures on the computer to help him  get to the  right  
level of arousal; then  he would  answer  the  same questions  as  
before. 
WITHIN   THREE  MONTHS, some  fine  Berkeley  undergraduate  
students  had  undergone  a variety  of sessions in  different  or­
ders.  In  the  set  of  sessions  conducted  when  they  were  in  a  
cold,  dispassionate  state,  they  predicted  what  their  sexual  
and  moral decisions would  be if they were aroused.  In the set 
of  sessions conducted when  they were in  a hot, aroused  state,  
they  also predicted  their  decisions—but this time, since they 
were  actually  in  the  grip  of  passion,  they  were  presumably  
more aware of their preferences in that  state. When the  study  
was  completed, the  conclusions were  consistent  and  clear—  
overwhelmingly clear, frighteningly clear. 
In  every case, our  bright young participants  answered  the  
questions very differently  when they were aroused from  when  
they  were  in  a  "cold"  state.  Across  the  19  questions  about  
sexual  preferences, when  Roy and  all  the  other  participants  
were  aroused  they  predicted  that  their  desire  to  engage  in  a  
variety  of  somewhat  odd  sexual  activities  would  be  nearly  
twice  as high  as  (72 percent  higher than)  they  had  predicted  
when  they  were cold. For example, the  idea of enjoying con­
tact  with  animals  was  more  than  twice  as  appealing  when  
they  were  in  a  state  of  arousal  as  when  they  were  in  a cold 
state. In the five questions about their propensity  to engage in 
immoral  activities, when  they  were  aroused  they  predicted  
their  propensity  to  be  more  than  twice  as  high  as  (136 per­
cent  higher  than)  they  had  predicted  in  the  cold  state.  Simi­
larly, in the set of questions about using condoms, and  despite  
the  warnings  that  had  been  hammered  into  them  over  the  
96 

the  influence   of   arousal   
years  about  the  importance  of  condoms,  they  were  25  per­
cent  more  likely in the  aroused  state than  in the  cold state  to  
predict  that  they  would  forego  condoms.  In  all  these  cases  
they  failed  to predict  the  influence of arousal  on  their  sexual  
preferences,  morality, and  approach  to  safe sex. 
The  results  showed  that  when  Roy and  the  other  partici­
pants  were  in  a cold, rational,  superego-driven  state, they  re­
spected  women;  they  were  not  particularly  attracted  to  the  
odd  sexual  activities we  asked  them  about;  they  always  took  
the  moral  high  ground;  and  they  expected  that  they  would  
always  use  a  condom.  They  thought  that  they   understood   
themselves,  their  preferences,  and  what  actions  they  were  
capable  of.  But  as  it  turned  out,  they  completely  underesti­
mated  their reactions. 
No  matter  how  we  looked  at  the  numbers,  it  was  clear  
that  the  magnitude  of  underprediction   by  the   participants   
was  substantial.  Across the  board,  they  revealed  in  their  un-
aroused  state  that  they  themselves  did  not  know  what  they  
were like once aroused.  Prevention, protection, conservatism, 
and  morality  disappeared  completely  from  the  radar  screen.  
They  were  simply  unable  to predict  the  degree  to  which  pas­
sion would  change  them.*  
IMAGINE   WAKING   UP  one  morning,  looking  in  the  mirror,  
and   discovering  that   someone  else—something   alien   but   
human—has   taken  over  your  body.  You're  uglier,  shorter,  
hairier;  your  lips  are  thinner,  your  incisors  are  longer,  your  
nails  are  fîlthy,  your  face  is  flatter.  Two  cold,  reptilian  eyes  
These  results apply  most  directly to sexual  arousal  and  its  influence  on  who  we  are; but 
we  can also  assume  that  other emotional  states  (anger,  hunger, excitement, jealousy,  and  
so on)  work  in  similar ways, making  us  strangers to  ourselves.  
97 

predictably  irrational  
gaze  back  at  you.  You long to  smash  something,  rape some­
one. You are not  you. You are  a  monster.  
Beset  by this  nightmarish  vision, Robert Louis Stevenson 
screamed  in  his  sleep  in  the  early hours of an  autumn  morn­
ing  in  1885.  Immediately  after  his  wife  awoke  him,  he  set  to  
work  on  what  he  called  a  "fine  bogey  tale"—Dr. Jekyll    and    
Mr.  Hyde—in    which he said, "Man  is not truly one, but  truly  
two."  The  book  was  an  overnight  success, and  no  wonder.  
The  story captivated the imagination of Victorians, who  were  
fascinated with the dichotomy between repressive  propriety—  
represented  by  the  mild-mannered  scientist Dr. Jekyll—and 
uncontrollable   passion,   embodied   in   the   murderous  Mr.  
Hyde. Dr. Jekyll  thought  he understood  how  to control  him­
self. But when  Mr. Hyde  took  over, look  out.  
The  story  was  frightening  and  imaginative,  but  it  wasn't  
new. Long before Sophocles's Oedipus    Rex  and Shakespeare's 
Macbeth,     the  war  between  interior  good  and  evil  had  been  
the  stuff  of myth,  religion, and  literature.  In Freudian  terms,  
each  of  us  houses  a  dark  self,  an  id,  a  brute  that  can  unpre­
dictably wrest  control away  from  the superego. Thus  a pleas­
ant,  friendly  neighbor,  seized  by  road  rage,  crashes  his  car  
into  a semi. A teenager  grabs  a gun  and  shoots his friends.  A  
priest  rapes  a  boy.  All  these  otherwise  good  people  assume  
that  they  understand  themselves. But  in  the  heat  of  passion,  
suddenly,  with  the  flip  of  some  interior  switch,  everything  
changes. 
Our  experiment  at Berkeley revealed not just the  old  story  
that   we  are  all  like  Jekyll  and  Hyde,  but  also  something  
new—that  every one of us, regardless of how  "good"  we are, 
underpredicts  the  effect  of passion  on  our  behavior.  In  every  
case,  the  participants  in  our  experiment  got  it  wrong.  Even  
the  most  brilliant and  rational  person,  in the heat of passion, 
98 

the  influence  of   arousal   
seems to be absolutely and  completely divorced  from  the  per­
son  he  thought  he  was.  Moreover,  it  is  not  just  that  people  
make wrong predictions  about  themselves—their  predictions  
are wrong  by  a large  margin.  
Most of the time, according to  the  results of the  study, Roy 
is smart, decent, reasonable, kind, and trustworthy.  His  frontal  
lobes are fully  functioning,  and  he is in control of his behavior. 
But  when  he's  in  a  state  of  sexual  arousal  and  the  reptilian  
brain takes over, he becomes unrecognizable to himself. 
Roy  thinks  he  knows  how  he  will  behave  in  an  aroused  
state,  but  his  understanding   is limited.  He  doesn't  truly  un­
derstand  that  as his sexual motivation becomes more  intense,  
he  may  throw  caution  to  the  wind.  He  may  risk  sexually  
transmitted  diseases  and  unwanted  pregnancies  in  order  to  
achieve  sexual  gratification.  When  he  is  gripped  by  passion,  
his  emotions  may  blur  the  boundary  between  what  is  right  
and  what  is wrong.  In fact,  he doesn't  have  a clue to how con­
sistently wild he really is, for  when  he is in one state and  tries  
to predict  his behavior  in another  state, he gets  it  wrong.  
Moreover, the  study  suggested that  our  inability to under­
stand  ourselves  in  a  different  emotional  state  does  not  seem  
to improve with  experience; we get it wrong  even if we  spend  
as  much  time  in  this  state  as  our  Berkeley  students   spend   
sexually  aroused.  Sexual  arousal  is  familiar,  personal,  very  
human,  and  utterly  commonplace. Even so, we all systemati­
cally  underpredict   the  degree  to  which  arousal  completely  
negates our  superego,  and  the way emotions can take control 
of  our  behavior.  
WHAT  HAPPENS,  THEN,  when  our  irrational  self  comes alive 
in  an  emotional  place that  we think  is familiar  but  in  fact  is  
99 

predictably   irrational   
unfamiliar?  If  we  fail  to  really  understand   ourselves,  is  it  
possible  to  somehow  predict  how  we  or  others  will  behave  
when  "out  of our  heads"—when  we're  really  angry,  hungry,  
frightened,  or  sexually  aroused?  Is  it  possible  to  do  some­
thing  about  this?  
The  answers  to  these  questions  are profound,  for  they  in­
dicate  that  we  must  be  wary  of  situations  in  which  our  Mr.  
Hyde  may take  over. When  the  boss criticizes us publicly, we 
might  be  tempted  to  respond  with  a  vehement  e-mail.  But  
wouldn't   we  be  better  off  putting  our  reply  in  the   "draft"   
folder  for  a  few  days? When  we  are  smitten  by  a  sports  car  
after  a test-drive  with  the wind  in our  hair, shouldn't  we take 
a  break—and  discuss  our  spouse's  plan  to  buy  a  minivan—  
before  signing  a contract to  buy  the car? 
Here are a few more examples of ways to protect  ourselves  
from  ourselves:  
Safe  Sex  
Many  parents  and  teenagers,  while  in  a  cold,  rational,  Dr.  
Jekyll   state,   tend   to   believe   that   the   mere   promise  of  
abstinence—commonly known  as "Just say no"—is  sufficient  
protection   against   sexually  transmitted   diseases   and   un­
wanted  pregnancies. Assuming that  this  levelheaded  thought  
will  prevail  even  when  emotions  reach  the  boiling point,  the  
advocates  of  "just  saying  no"  see  no  reason  to  carry  a  con­
dom  with  them.  But  as  our  study  shows,  in  the  heat  of  pas­
sion,  we  are  all  in  danger  of switching  from  "Just  say no"  to  
"Yes!"  in  a  heartbeat;  and  if no  condom  is available, we  are  
likely to  say yes, regardless  of the  dangers.  
What  does  this  suggest?  First,  widespread  availability of 
condoms  is  essential.  We  should  not  decide  in  a  cool  state  
100 

the  influence   of   arousal   
whether  or  not  to  bring  condoms;  they  must  be there  just  in  
case. Second, unless we understand  how  we might react in  an  
emotional  state,  we  will  not  be  able  to  predict  this  transfor­
mation.  For  teenagers,  this  problem  is  most  likely  exacer­
bated,   and   thus   sex  education   should   focus   less  on   the   
physiology and  biology of the reproductive  system, and  more  
on  strategies  to  deal  with  the  emotions  that  accompany  sex­
ual  arousal.  Third,  we  must  admit  that  carrying  condoms  
and  even  vaguely  understanding   the  emotional  firestorm  of  
sexual arousal  may not  be  enough.  
There  are  most  likely  many  situations  where  teenagers  
simply  won't  be  able  to  cope  with  their  emotions.  A  better  
strategy,  for  those  who  want   to  guarantee   that   teenagers   
avoid  sex,  is  to  teach  teenagers  that  they  must  walk  away  
from  the  fire  of  passion  before  they  are  close  enough  to  be  
drawn  in.  Accepting  this  advice  might  not  be  easy,  but  our  
results  suggest  that  it  is  easier  for  them  to  fight  temptation  
before  it  arises  than  after  it  has  started  to  lure  them  in.  In  
other  words,  avoiding  temptation  altogether  is  easier  than  
overcoming it. 
To  be  sure,  this  sounds  a  lot  like  the  "Just  say no"  cam­
paign,  which  urges  teenagers  to  walk  away  from  sex  when  
tempted.  But the  difference  is that  "Just  say no"  assumes  we  
can  turn  off passion  at  will, at  any  point,  whereas  our  study  
shows this  assumption  to  be false.  If we put  aside  the  debate  
on the pros  and  cons of teenage sex, what  is clear is that  if we 
want  to  help  teenagers  avoid  sex,  sexually  transmitted  dis­
eases,  and  unwanted   pregnancies,  we  have  two  strategies.  
Either  we  can  teach  them  how  to  say  no  before    any  tempta­
tion takes hold, and  before  a situation  becomes impossible to 
resist; or alternatively, we can get them  prepared  to deal  with  
the  consequences  of  saying  yes  in  the  heat  of  passion  (by  
101 

predictably   irrational   
carrying  a  condom,  for  example).  One  thing  is  sure:  if  we  
don't  teach our  young people how  to deal with  sex when  they  
are  half  out  of  their  minds,  we  are  not  only  fooling  them;  
we're  fooling  ourselves  as  well.  Whatever  lessons  we  teach  
them,  we  need  to  help  them  understand  that  they  will  react  
differently  when  they  are calm and  cool from  when  their  hor­
mones  are  raging  at  fever  pitch  (and  of course  the  same  also  
applies  to our  own behavior). 
Safe  Driving  
Similarly,  we  need  to  teach  teenagers  (and  everyone  else)  not  
to drive when  their emotions  are  at  a boil. It's not  just inexpe­
rience and  hormones  that  make  so many teenagers crash  their  
own  or  their  parents'  cars.  It's  also  the  car  full  of  laughing  
friends,  with  the CD player blaring at  an  adrenaline-pumping  
decibel  level,  and  the  driver's  right  hand  searching  for  the  
french  fries or his girlfriend's  knee. Who's thinking  about  risk  
in  that  situation?  Probably no  one.  A recent  study  found  that  
a  teenager driving  alone was 40 percent  more likely to get into 
an  accident than  an  adult. But with  one other  teenager  in  the  
car,   the percentage was twice that—and  with  a third  teenager  
along for the ride, the percentage doubled  again.
5   
To  react to this, we need  an intervention  that  does not  rely  
on the premise that teenagers will remember how they  wanted  
to  behave  while  in  a  cold  state  (or how  their  parents  wanted  
them  to  behave)  and  follow  these  guidelines  even  when  they  
are  in  a hot  state. Why  not  build  into  cars precautionary  de­
vices to foil teenagers' behavior? Such cars might be  equipped  
with  a modified  OnStar system that  the teenager and  the  par­
ents  configure  in  a  cold  state.  If  a  car  exceeds 65  miles  per  
hour  on  the  highway,  or  more  than  40  miles  per  hour  in  a  
102 

the    influence   of   arousal   
residential  zone,  for  example, there  will  be  consequences. If 
the  car  exceeds  the  speed  limit  or  begins  to  make  erratic  
turns,  the  radio  might  switch  from  2Pac  to  Schumann's  Sec­
ond  Symphony  (this would  slow  most  teenagers). Or  the  car  
might  blast the  air conditioning  in winter,  switch  on  the  heat  
in  summer,  or  automatically  call Mom  (a real  downer  if  the  
driver's  friends  are  present). With  these  substantial  and  im­
mediate consequences in mind, then, the driver  and  his or her 
friends  would  realize that  it's time for Mr. Hyde to move over 
and  let Dr. Jekyll  drive.  
This  is not  at  all far-fetched.  Modern  cars are already  full  
of  computers  that  control  the  fuel  injection, the  climate sys­
tem,  and  the  sound  system.  Cars  equipped  with  OnStar  are  
already  linked  to  a  wireless  network.  With  today's  technol­
ogy,   it  would  be  a  simple  matter  for  a  car  to  automatically  
call Mom. 
Better  Life  Decisions  
Not  uncommonly, women  who  are pregnant  for the  first  time  
tell  their  doctors,  before the  onset of labor, that  they  will  re­
fuse  any  kind  of painkiller. The  decision  made  in  their  cold  
state  is  admirable,  but  they  make  this  decision  when  they  
can't  imagine  the  pain  that  can  come  with  childbirth   (let   
alone  the  challenges  of  child  rearing).  After  all  is  said  and  
done,  they  may wish  they'd  gone for  the  epidural.  
With  this  in mind,  Sumi  (my lovely wife)  and  I,  readying  
ourselves  for  the  birth  of  our  first  child,  Amit,  decided  to  
test  our  mettle  before  making  any  decisions about  using  an  
epidural.  To do  this,  Sumi plunged  her  hands  into  a  bucket  
of   ice  for  two  minutes   (we  did  this  on  the  advice  of  our  
birth  coach, who  swore  to  us  that  the  resulting  pain  would  
103 

predictably   irrational   
be  similar  to  the  pain  of  childbirth),  while  I  coached  her  
breathing.  If Sumi was  unable  to bear the pain  of this expe­
rience,  we  figured,   she'd  probably  want  painkillers   when   
she  was  going  through  the  actual  birth.  After  two  minutes  
of  holding  her  hands  in  the  ice bucket,  Sumi  clearly under­
stood  the  appeal  of an  epidural.  During  the  birth  itself,  any  
ounce of love Sumi ever had  for her husband  was completely 
transferred  to  the  anesthesiologist,  who  produced  the  epi­
dural  at  the  critical point.  (With our  second child, we  made  
it  to  the  hospital  about  two  minutes  before  Neta  was  born,  
so  Sumi  did  end   up  experiencing  an  analgesic-free  birth  
after  all.)  
LOOKING   FROM   ONE  emotional  state  to  another  is  difficult.  
It's  not  always  possible; and  as  Sumi  learned  it  can  be  pain­
ful.  But  to  make  informed  decisions  we  need  to  somehow  
experience  and  understand  the  emotional  state  we  will  be  in  
at  the  other  side  of  the  experience. Learning  how  to  bridge  
this  gap  is  essential  to  making  some  of  the  important  deci­
sions of our lives. 
It  is unlikely that  we  would  move to  a  different  city  with­
out  asking  friends  who  live  there  how  they  like  it,  or  even  
choose  to  see  a  film  without  reading  some  reviews.  Isn't  it  
strange  that  we invest so little in learning  about  both  sides of 
ourselves? Why should  we reserve this subject for psychology 
classes  when  failure  to  understand   it  can  bring  about  re­
peated  failures  in  so  many  aspects  of our  lives? We  need  to  
explore the two  sides of ourselves; we need to understand  the  
cold  state  and  the  hot  state;  we  need  to  see how  the  gap  be­
tween  the  hot  and  cold  states  benefits  our  lives, and  where  it  
leads  us  astray.  
104 

the  influence   of   arousal   
What  did  our  experiments  suggest?  It  may  be  that  our  
models  of  human  behavior  need  to  be  rethought.   Perhaps   
there  is no  such thing  as  a fully  integrated  human  being. We 
may,  in  fact,  be  an  agglomeration  of  multiple  selves.  Al­
though  there is nothing  much  we can do to get our Dr. Jekyll 
to  fully  appreciate  the  strength  of  our  Mr.  Hyde,  perhaps  
just  being aware  that  we  are prone  to  making  the wrong  de­
cisions  when  gripped   by  intense  emotion  may  help  us,  in  
some  way,  to  apply  our  knowledge  of our  "Hyde"  selves to 
our  daily activities. 
How can we try to force our  "Hyde"  self to behave better? 
This  is what  Chapter  6 is about. 
105 

APPENDIX:  CHAPTER  5  
A  complete  list of the  questions  we  asked, with  the  mean  re­
sponse  and  percentage  differences.  Each  question  was  pre­
sented  on  a  visual-analog  scale that  stretched  between  "no"  
on  the  left  (zero) to  "possibly" in the  middle  (50) to  "yes" on 
the  right  (100).  
TABLE  1  
RATE THE  ATTRACTIVENESS  OF  DIFFERENT  ACTIVITIES  
Question Nonaroused Aroused Difference, 
percent 
Are women's  shoes  erotic?  
42 65 55 
Can  you  imagine  being  attracted  to  
a  12-year-old  girl?  23 46 
100 
Can  you  imagine  having  sex with  a  
40-year-old  woman?  58 
77 33 
Can  you  imagine  having  sex with a 
50-year-old  woman?  28 
55 96 
Can  you  imagine  having  sex with a 
60-year-old  woman?  
7 
23 
229 
Can  you  imagine  having  sex with a 
man? 
CO 14 75 
Could it be fun to  have  sex  with  
someone who  was  extremely  fat?  
13 24 85 
Could  you  enjoy  having  sex  with  
someone  you  hated?  
53 
77 45 
If you were  attracted  to  a woman 
and  she  proposed  a threesome 
with  a man, would  you  do  it?  19 
34 79 
Is a woman  sexy when  she's  
sweating? 56 
72 29 
Is the  smell  of  cigarette  smoke  
arousing? 13 
22 
69 
Would  it be fun  to  get  tied  up  by  
your  sexual  partner?  63 81 
29 
Would  it be fun to  tie  up  your  
sexual  partner?  47 
75 
60 

TABLE   1  (continued)  
RATE  THE  ATTRACTIVENESS  OF  DIFFERENT   ACTIVITIES   
Question 
Nonaroused 
Aroused 
Difference, 
percent 
Would  it be fun to watch  an  
attractive woman   urinating?   
25 32 
28 
Would  you  find  it  exciting  to  spank  
your  sexual  partner?  
61 72 
18 
Would  you  find  it  exciting  to  get  
spanked  by  an  attractive  woman?  
50 
68 36 
Would  you find  it exciting to  have  
anal  sex?  
46 77 67 
Can you  imagine  getting  sexually  
excited  by contact with  an  animal?  
6 
16 
167 
Is just  kissing  frustrating?  
41 
69 
68 
TABLE   2   
RATE  THE  LIKELIHOOD  OF  ENGAGING  IN   IMMORAL   
BEHAVIORS  LIKE  DATE  RAPE  (A  STRICT   ORDER   
OF  SEVERITY  IS  NOT   IMPLIED)   
Question 
Nonaroused Aroused Difference, 
percent 
Would  you take  a date to  a  fancy  
restaurant  to  increase  your  chance  
of  having  sex with  her?  
55 
70 
27 
Would  you tell  a woman  that  you  
loved  her to  increase the  chance  
that  she would  have  sex with  you?  30 
51 
70 
Would  you  encourage  your  date  to  
drink  to  increase the  chance  that  
she would  have  sex with  you?  
46 
63 
37 
Would  you  keep trying  to  have  sex  
after  your  date  says  "no"?  
20 45 125 
Would  you  slip  a woman  a drug  to  
increase the  chance that  she  would  
have  sex with  you?  5 26 420 

predictably  irrational  
TABLE  3  
RATE  YOUR  TENDENCY  TO  USE, AND   OUTCOMES   
OF  NOT  USING,  BIRTH   CONTROL   
Question 
Nonaroused Aroused Difference, 
percent 
Birth  control  is the  woman's  
responsibility. 
34 44 29 
A  condom  decreases  sexual  
pleasure. 
66 
78 18 
A  condom  interferes with  sexual  
spontaneity. 58 
73 26 
Would  you  always  use  a condom if 
you  didn't  know  the  sexual  history  
of  a new  sexual  partner?  
88 69 
22 
Would  you  use  a condom  even if 
you were  afraid that  a woman 
might  change  her  mind  while  you  
went  to  get  it?  86 
60 30 
108 

CHAPTER      6      
The Problem of 
Procrastination  and  
Self-Control 
Why  We Can't   Make   Ourselves   Do   
What  We Want  to  Do  
O
nto  the  American  scene,  populated   by  big  homes,  big  
cars,  and  big-screen  plasma  televisions, comes  another  
big phenomenon:  the  biggest  decline  in  the  personal  savings  
rate  since the Great  Depression.  
Go  back 25 years, and  double-digit  savings  rates  were  the  
norm.  As recently as 1994 the savings rate was nearly  five per­
cent.  But  by 2006  the  savings  rate  had  fallen  below  zero—to  
negative  one  percent.  Americans  were  not  only  not  saving;  
they  were  spending  more  than  they  earned.  Europeans  do  a  
lot  better—they  save an  average of 20 percent. Japan's  rate  is  
25 percent. China's  is 50 percent. So what's  up  with America? 
I  suppose  one  answer  is that  Americans  have  succumbed  
to rampant consumerism. Go back to  a home  built  before  we  

predictably   irrational   
had  to  have  everything,  for  instance,  and  check out  the  size  
of  the  closets.  Our  house  in  Cambridge,  Massachusetts,  for  
example,  was  built  in  1890. It  has  no  closets  whatsoever.  
Houses  in  the  1940s  had  closets barely  big  enough  to  stand  
in.  The  closet  of  the  1970s  was  a  bit  larger,  perhaps   deep   
enough  for  a  fondue  pot,  a  box  of  eight-track  tapes,  and  a  
few  disco dresses. But the closet of today  is a different  breed.  
"Walk-in  closet"  means  that  you  can  literally  walk  in  for  
quite  a  distance.  And  no  matter  how  deep  these  closets are, 
Americans  have found  ways to  fill them  right  up  to the closet 
door. 
Another  answer—the  other  half  of the problem—is  the  re­
cent explosion in consumer credit. The average American  fam­
ily now has six credit cards  (in 2005 alone, Americans received 
6  billion  direct-mail  solicitations  for  credit  cards).  Frighten-
ingly, the  average  family  debt  on  these  cards  is about  $9,000;  
and  seven  in  10 households  borrow  on  credit  cards  to  cover  
such basic living expenses as food, utilities, and  clothing.  
So  wouldn't  it  just  be wiser  if Americans  learned  to  save,  
as in the old days, and  as the rest of the world does, by  divert­
ing some cash to the cookie jar, and  delaying some  purchases  
until  we  can  really  afford  them?  Why  can't  we  save part of 
our  paychecks, as  we  know  we  should?  Why  can't  we  resist  
those  new  purchases?  Why  can't  we  exert  some  good  old-
fashioned self-control? 
The  road  to  hell, they  say, is paved  with  good  intentions.  
And  most  of  us  know  what  that's  all  about.  We promise  to  
save  for  retirement,  but  we  spend  the  money  on  a  vacation.  
We  vow  to  diet,  but  we  surrender  to  the  allure  of the  dessert  
cart.  We promise  to  have  our  cholesterol  checked  regularly,  
and  then  we cancel our  appointment.  
How  much  do  we  lose when  our  fleeting  impulses  deflect  
110 

the  problem   of  procrastination  and   self-control   
111 
us  from  our  long-term  goals?  How  much  is  our  health  af­
fected  by  those  missed  appointments  and  our  lack  of exer­
cise?  How  much  is  our  wealth  reduced  when  we  forget  our  
vow to  save more and  consume less ? Why do  we lose the  fight  
against procrastination  so  frequently?  
IN   CHAPTER  5  we  discussed  how  emotions  grab  hold  of  us  
and  make  us  view  the  world  from  a  different  perspective.  
Procrastination  (from  the  Latin  pro,  meaning  for;  and     eras,     
meaning  tomorrow)      is rooted  in  the  same  kind  of  problem.  
When  we promise  to  save our  money,  we  are  in  a cool  state.  
When  we promise to exercise and  watch  our  diet, again  we're  
cool. But then  the lava flow of hot emotion comes rushing in: 
just  when  we promise  to  save, we  see  a  new  car,  a  mountain  
bike, or  a pair of shoes that  we must  have. Just when  we  plan  
to exercise regularly, we find  a reason to  sit all day  in front of 
the television. And  as for the diet? I'll take that  slice of choco­
late  cake  and  begin  the  diet  in  earnest  tomorrow.  Giving  up  
on   our   long-term   goals   for   immediate   gratification,   my   
friends,  is  procrastination.  
As  a  university  professor,  I'm  all  too  familiar  with  pro­
crastination. At the  beginning of every  semester  my  students  
make  heroic  promises  to  themselves—vowing  to  read  their  
assignments  on  time,  submit  their  papers  on  time,  and  in  
general,   stay   on   top   of  things.   And   every   semester   I've   
watched  as temptation  takes  them  out  on  a date,  over to  the  
student  union  for  a  meeting,  and  off  on  a  ski  trip  in  the  
mountains—while  their  workload  falls  farther  and   farther   
behind.  In  the  end,  they  wind  up  impressing  me,  not  with  
their punctuality,  but with their creativity—inventing stories, 
excuses, and family tragedies to explain their tardiness. (Why 

predictably   irrational   
do family tragedies generally occur during the last two  weeks  
of  the semester?) 
After  I'd  been  teaching  at MIT  for  a  few  years,  my  col­
league  Klaus  Wertenbroch  (a  professor  at  INSEAD,  a  busi­
ness  school  with  campuses  in  France  and  Singapore)  and  I  
decided to work  up  a few  studies  that  might  get to the root of 
the  problem,  and  just maybe  offer  a  fix for  this  common  hu­
man  weakness.  Our  guinea  pigs  this  time  would  be  the  de­
lightful  students  in  my class on  consumer  behavior.  
As  they  settled  into  their  chairs that  first  morning,  full of 
anticipation  (and,  no  doubt,  with  resolutions  to  stay  on  top  
of  their class assignments), the  students  listened to me review 
the  syllabus  for  the  course.  There  would  be  three  main  pa­
pers  over  the  12-week semester,  I explained.  Together, these 
papers  would  constitute  much  of their  final  grade.  
"And  what  are the deadlines?" asked one of them,  waving  
his  hand  from  the  back.  I  smiled.  "You can  hand  in  the  pa­
pers  at  any  time  before  the  end  of  the  semester,"  I  replied.  
"It's entirely  up  to you." The students  looked back blankly. 
"Here's  the  deal,"  I  explained.  "By the  end  of the  week,  
you must commit to  a deadline  date  for each paper.  Once you 
set  your  deadlines,  they  can't  be  changed."  Late  papers,  I  
added,  would  be penalized  at  the  rate  of one  percent  off  the  
grade  for  each  day  late.  The  students  could  always  turn  in  
their papers  before their deadlines without  penalty, of course, 
but  since I wouldn't  be  reading  any  of them  until  the  end of 
the semester, there would  be no particular  advantage  in  terms  
of  grades  for  doing  so.  
In  other  words,  the  ball  was  in  their  court.  Would  they  
have the  self-control to  play the  game?  
"But  Professor  Ariely,"  asked  Gaurav,  a  clever  master's  
student  with  a charming  Indian  accent, "given  these  instruc-
112 

the  problem  of  procrastination and  self-control  
113 
tions  and  incentives, wouldn't  it  make  sense  for  us  to  select  
the  last date possible?" 
"You  can  do  that,"  I  replied.  "If you  find  that  it  makes  
sense,  by all means  do  it."  
Under  these conditions, what  would  you  have  done?  
I promise  to  submit  paper  1 on  week  
I promise  to submit  paper  2 on  week  
I promise to  submit  paper  3 on  week  
What  deadlines  did  the  students  pick  for  themselves?  A  
perfectly  rational  student  would  follow  Gaurav's  advice  and  
set  all the  deadlines  for  the  last day of class—after all, it  was  
always possible to submit  papers  earlier without  a penalty,  so  
why take a chance and  select an earlier deadline than  needed?  
Delaying  the  deadlines  to  the  end  was  clearly the  best  deci­
sion  if  students  were  perfectly  rational.  But what  if the  stu­
dents  are  not  rational? What  if they  succumb  to  temptation  
and  are  prone  to  procrastination?  What  if they  realize  their  
weakness? If the  students  are not  rational,  and  they know  it,  
they  could  use  the  deadlines  to  force  themselves  to  behave  
better. They  could  set  early  deadlines  and  by  doing  so  force  
themselves to  start  working  on  the  projects  earlier  in  the  se­
mester. 
What  did  my students  do? They used  the scheduling tool I 
provided  them  with  and  spaced  the  timing  of  their  papers  
across  the  whole  semester.  This  is  fine  and  good,  as  it  sug­
gests  that  the  students  realize their  problems  with  procrasti­
nation  and  that  if  given  the  right  opportunities  they  try  to  
control  themselves—but  the  main  question  is  whether   the   
tool  was  indeed  helpful  in  improving  their  grades.  To  find  
out  about  this,  we  had  to  conduct  other  variations  of  the  

predictably   irrational   
same experiments in other classes and  compare the quality of 
papers  across the  different  conditions  (classes).  
Now   THAT  I  had  Gaurav  and  his  classmates choosing  their  
individual  deadlines,  I  went  to  my  other  two  classes—with  
markedly  different  deals.  In  the  second  class,  I told  the  stu­
dents  that  they  would  have no  deadlines  at  all during the se­
mester. They merely needed  to submit  their papers  by the  end  
of  the  last  class.  They  could  turn  the  papers   in  early,  of  
course,  but  there  was  no  grade  benefit  to  doing  so. I  suppose  
they  should  have been happy:  I had  given them  complete  flex­
ibility  and  freedom  of  choice. Not  only  that,  but  they  also  
had  the  lowest  risk  of  being  penalized  for  missing  an  inter­
mediate  deadline.  
The  third  class  received  what  might  be  called  a  dictato­
rial  treatment:  I  dictated  three  deadlines  for  the  three  pa­
pers,  set  at  the  fourth,   eighth,  and  twelfth   weeks.  These  
were  my  marching  orders,  and  they  left  no  room  for choice 
or flexibility. 
Of  these three classes, which do you think  achieved the best 
final  grades? Was it Gaurav  and  his classmates, who  had  some  
flexibility?  Or  the  second class, which  had  a single deadline  at  
the end, and thus complete flexibility? Or the third  class, which 
had  its  deadlines  dictated  from  above,  and  therefore  had  no  
flexibility? Which class do  you predict  did  worst?  
When  the  semester  was  over, Jose  Silva,  the  teaching  as­
sistant  for  the  classes  (himself  an  expert  on  procrastination  
and  currently  a  professor  at  the  University  of  California  at  
Berkeley),  returned  the  papers  to  the  students.  We  could  at  
last  compare  the  grades  across  the  three  different   deadline   
conditions.  We found  that  the  students  in  the  class with  the  
114 

the  problem  of  procrastination and   self-control   
115 
three  firm  deadlines  got  the  best grades;  the  class in  which  I  
set no  deadlines  at  all  (except for  the  final  deadline)  had  the  
worst  grades;  and  the  class  in  which  Gaurav  and  his  class­
mates were allowed to choose their own  three deadlines  (but  
with  penalties  for  failing  to  meet  them)  finished  in  the  mid­
dle,  in  terms  of  their  grades  for  the  three  papers  and  their  
final  grade.  
What  do  these results  suggest? First, that  students  do  pro­
crastinate   (big  news);  and   second,  that   tightly   restricting   
their   freedom    (equally   spaced   deadlines,   imposed    from    
above)  is  the  best  cure  for  procrastination.  But  the  biggest  
revelation  is that  simply offering the  students  a tool by which 
they  could precommit  to  deadlines  helped  them  achieve bet­
ter  grades.  
What  this  finding  implies  is  that  the  students  generally  
understood  their  problem  with  procrastination  and  took  ac­
tion to  fight it when  they were given the opportunity  to do so, 
achieving relative success in improving  their  grades.  But  why  
were  the  grades  in  the  self-imposed  deadlines  condition  not  
as good  as  the  grades  in  the  dictatorial  (externally imposed) 
deadlines  condition? My  feeling  is this:  not  everyone  under­
stands  their  tendency  to  procrastinate,  and  even  those  who  
do  recognize their  tendency  to  procrastinate  may  not  under­
stand  their  problem  completely.  Yes, people  may  set  dead­
lines  for  themselves,  but  not  necessarily  the  deadlines  that  
are  best for getting the  best  performance.  
When  I  looked  at  the  deadlines   set  by  the  students   in   
Gaurav's  class,  this  was  indeed  the  case.  Although  the  vast  
majority  of  the  students  in  this  class  spaced  their  deadlines  
substantially   (and  got  grades  that   were  as  good  as  those  
earned  by students  in the dictatorial condition), some did  not  
space  their  deadlines  much,  and  a  few  did  not  space  their  

predictably   irrational   
deadlines  at all. These students  who  did not  space their  dead­
lines sufficiently pulled  the  average grades of this class  down.  
Without  properly   spaced  deadlines—deadlines   that   would   
have forced the  students  to start  working  on their papers  ear­
lier in the semester—the  final  work  was generally rushed  and  
poorly written  (even without  the extra penalty of one percent 
off  the  grade  for  each day of delay). 
Interestingly,  these  results  suggest  that  although  almost  
everyone  has  problems  with  procrastination,  those  who  rec­
ognize  and  admit  their  weakness  are  in  a  better  position  to  
utilize  available  tools  for  precommitment  and  by  doing  so,  
help themselves overcome it. 
So  THAT  WAS  my experience with  my  students.  What  does  it  
have to  do  with  everyday  life?  A lot,  I think.  Resisting temp­
tation  and  instilling  self-control  are  general  human  goals,  
and  repeatedly  failing to  achieve them  is a source of much of 
our  misery.  When  I  look  around,  I  see  people  trying  their  
best to do  the  right  thing,  whether  they  are dieters  vowing  to  
avoid  a tempting  dessert  tray  or families vowing to  spend  less  
and  save more. The  struggle  for  control  is all around  us. We 
see it in books and  magazines. Radio and  television  airwaves  
are choked with  messages of self-improvement  and  help.  
And  yet,  for  all this  electronic chatter  and  focus  in  print,  
we  find ourselves again  and  again  in the same predicament  as  
my  students—failing  over  and  over  to  reach  our  long-term  
goals.  Why? Because  without  precommitments,  we  keep  on  
falling  for  temptation.  
What's  the  alternative? From  the  experiments  that  I  have  
described above, the most obvious conclusion is that  when  an  
authoritative  "external  voice"  gives  the  orders,  most  of  us  
116 

the   problem  of  procrastination and   self-control   
117 
will jump  to  attention.  After  all, the  students  for  whom  I set 
the  deadlines—for  whom  I provided  the  "parental"  voice—  
did  best. Of course, barking  orders, while very effective, may 
not  always  be  feasible  or  desirable.  What's  a  good  compro­
mise? It seems that  the best course might  be to  give people  an  
opportunity  to commit up  front  to their preferred  path of ac­
tion. This  approach  might  not  be  as  effective  as the  dictato­
rial  treatment,  but  it  can  help  push  us  in  the  right  direction  
(perhaps  even  more  so  if we  train  people  to  do  it,  and  give  
them  experience in setting their own  deadlines).  
What's the bottom line? We have problems with self-control, 
related to immediate and delayed gratification—no doubt  there.  
But   each  of  the  problems  we  face  has  potential  self-control  
mechanisms,  as  well. If we  can't  save  from  our  paycheck,  we  
can   take  advantage  of our  employer's automatic  deduction  op­
tion;  if we  don't  have  the  will  to  exercise regularly  alone,  we  
can   make  an  appointment  to  exercise in  the  company  of  our  
friends.  These are the tools that  we can commit to  in  advance,  
and  they may help us be the kind of people we want  to be. 
WHAT   OTHER   PROCRASTINATION problems  might  precom-
mitment  mechanisms  solve?  Consider  health  care  and  con­
sumer  debt.  
Health  Care  
Everyone  knows  that  preventive  medicine  is  generally  more  
cost-effective—for   both  individuals  and  society—than  our  
current  remedial  approach.  Prevention  means  getting  health  
exams on  a regular  basis, before problems develop. But having 
a  colonoscopy or mammogram  is an ordeal. Even a cholesterol 

predictably   irrational   
check,  which  requires  blood  to  be  drawn,  is  unpleasant.  So  
while  our  long-term  health  and  longevity  depend  on  under­
going  such  tests, in  the  short  term  we procrastinate  and  pro­
crastinate and  procrastinate.  
But  can  you  imagine  if we  all  got  the  required  health  ex­
ams on time? Think how many serious health problems could 
be caught if they were diagnosed  early. Think how  much cost 
could  be cut  from  health-care  spending,  and  how  much  mis­
ery would  be saved  in the process. 
So how  do we fix this problem? Well, we could have a dic­
tatorial  solution,  in  which  the  state  (in  the  Orwellian  sense)  
would  dictate  our  regular  checkups. That  approach  worked  
well  with  my  students,  who  were  given  a  deadline  and  per­
formed  well. In society, no doubt,  we would  all be healthier  if  
the health  police arrived  in  a van  and  took procrastinators  to  
the  ministry of cholesterol control for  blood tests. 
This  may  seem  extreme,  but  think  of  the  other  dictates  
that  society imposes on  us for our  own  good. We may receive 
tickets  for  jaywalking,  and  for  having  our  seat  belts  unse­
cured.  No  one  thought  20 years  ago  that  smoking  would  be  
banned  in most public buildings  across America, as well as in 
restaurants  and  bars,  but  today  it  is—with  a  hefty  fine  in­
curred   for  lighting  up.  And  now   we  have  the   movement   
against trans fats. Should people be deprived of heart-clogging 
french  fries?  
Sometimes  we  strongly  support  regulations  that  restrain  
our  self-destructive  behaviors,  and  at  other  times  we  have  
equally  strong  feelings  about  our  personal  freedom.  Either  
way, it's always  a  trade-off.  
But  if  mandatory  health  checkups  won't  be  accepted  by  
the public, what  about  a middle ground,  like the  self-imposed  
deadlines  I gave to  Gaurav  and  his classmates  (the  deadlines  
118 

the  problem  of  procrastination and   self-control   
119 
that  offered  personal  choice,  but  also had  penalties  attached  
for  the  procrastinators) ? This  might  be  the  perfect  compro­
mise  between  authoritarianism,  on  the  one  hand,  and  what  
we have too  often  in preventive  health  today—complete  free­
dom  to  fail.  
Suppose  your  doctor  tells  you  that  you  need  to  get  your  
cholesterol  checked. That  means  fasting  the  night  before  the  
blood test, driving to the lab the next morning  without  break­
fast,  sitting  in  a crowded  reception  room  for  what  seems like 
hours,  and  finally, having the  nurse  come and  get you  so  that  
she can  stick a needle  into your  arm.  Facing those  prospects,  
you immediately begin to procrastinate. But suppose  the doc­
tor charged you an  up-front  $100 deposit  for the test,  refund­
able  only  if you  showed  up  promptly  at  the  appointed  time.  
Would  you  be more  likely to  show  up  for  the test? 
What if the doctor  asked  you if you  would  like to pay  this  
$100 deposit  for the test? Would you accept this  self-imposed  
challenge? And  if you  did,  would  it make  you  more  likely to 
show  up  for the procedure?  Suppose the procedure  was  more  
complicated:  a colonoscopy, for instance. Would you  be will­
ing  to  commit  to  a  $200  deposit,  refundable   only  if  you  
arrived  at  the  appointment  on  time? If so, you  will  have  rep­
licated  the  condition  that  I  offered  Gaurav's  class,  a  condi­
tion  that  certainly  motivated  the  students  to  be  responsible  
for  their  own decisions. 
How   ELSE  COULD  we  defeat  procrastination  in  health  care?  
Suppose  we could  repackage most of our  medical and  dental  
procedures  so that  they were predictable  and  easily done. Let 
me tell you  a story that  illustrates this  idea.  
Several years ago, Ford Motor Company  struggled  to  find  

predictably   irrational   
the  best  way  to  get  car  owners  back  into  the  dealerships  for  
routine  automobile  maintenance.  The  problem  was  that  the  
standard  Ford  automobile  had  something  like  18,000  parts  
that  might  need  servicing,  and  unfortunately  they  didn't  all  
need  servicing  at  the  same  time  (one  Ford  engineer  deter­
mined  that   a  particular  axle  bolt  needed  inspection  every  
3,602  miles).  And  this  was  just  part  of  the  problem:  since  
Ford  had  more  than  20  vehicle  types,  plus  various  model  
years, the  servicing of them  all was  nearly  impossible to  pon­
der.  All that  consumers,  as  well  as  service advisers, could  do  
was  page  through  volumes  of thick  manuals  in  order  to  de­
termine  what  services were  needed.  
But  Ford  began  to  notice  something  over  at  the  Honda  
dealerships.  Even  though  the  18,000  or  so  parts  in  Honda  
cars  had  the  same  ideal  maintenance  schedules  as  the  Ford  
cars, Honda  had  lumped  them  all into three  "engineering  in­
tervals"  (for instance, every six months  or 5,000  miles, every 
year  or  10,000  miles, and  every  two  years  or  25,000  miles).  
This  list  was  displayed  on  the  wall  of the  reception  room  in  
the  service department.  All the  hundreds of service activities 
were  boiled  down  to  simple,  mileage-based  service  events  
that  were  common  across  all  vehicles and  model  years. The 
board  had  every  maintenance  service  activity  bundled,  se­
quenced, and  priced. Anyone could  see when  service was  due  
and  how  much  it would  cost.  
But  the  bundle  board  was  more than  convenient  informa­
tion:  It  was  a  true  procrastination-buster,   as  it  instructed  
customers to  get their  service done  at  specific times and  mile­
ages.  It  guided  them  along.  And  it  was  so  simple  that  any  
customer  could  understand   it.  Customers  were  no  longer  
confused.   They  no   longer  procrastinated.   Servicing  their  
Hondas  on  time was easy. 
120 

the  problem  of  procrastination and   self-control   
121 
Some  people  at  Ford  thought  this  was  a  great  idea,  but  at  
first  the  Ford  engineers  fought  it. They  had  to  be convinced 
that, yes, drivers could go 9,000 miles without  an oil change— 
but  that  5,000  miles  would  align  the  oil  change  with  every­
thing  else that  needed  to  be done. They had  to  be convinced 
that  a  Mustang  and  a  F-250  Super  Duty  truck,  despite  their  
technological  differences,  could  be  put  on  the  same  mainte­
nance  schedule.  They  had  to  be  convinced  that   rebundling   
their  18,000  maintenance  options  into  three  easily  scheduled  
service  events—making  maintenance  as  easy  as  ordering  a  
Value  Meal  at  McDonald's—was  not  bad  engineering,  but  
good  customer  service  (not  to  mention  good  business). The 
winning  argument,  in  fact,  was  that  it  is better  to  have  con­
sumers  service  their  vehicles  at  somewhat  compromised  in­
tervals than  not  to  service them  at all! 
In  the  end,  it  happened:  Ford  joined  Honda  in  bundling  
its   services.  Procrastination   stopped.   Ford's   service   bay,   
which  had  been  40  percent  vacant,  filled  up.  The  dealers  
made  money,  and  in  just  three  years  Ford  matched  Honda's  
success  in the  service bay. 
So  couldn't  we make  comprehensive  physicals and  tests  as  
simple—and,  with  the addition  of self-imposed  financial  pen­
alties  (or better,  a  "parental"  voice),  bring  the  quality  of  our  
health  way  up  and  at  the  same  time  make  the  overall  costs  
significantly  less? The  lesson  to  learn  from  Ford's experience 
is  that  bundling  our  medical  tests  (and  procedures)  so  that  
people  remember  to  do  them  is far  smarter  than  adhering  to  
an  erratic  series of health  commands  that  people  are  unwill­
ing to follow. And so the big question: can we shape America's 
medical  morass  and  make  it  as  easy  as  ordering   a   Happy   
Meal?  Thoreau  wrote,  "Simplify!  Simplify!"  And,   indeed,   
simplification  is one mark of real genius. 

predictably  irrational  
Savings 
We  could  order  people  to  stop  spending,  as  an  Orwellian  
edict. This would  be similar to  the  case of my third  group of 
students,  for whom  the  deadline  was  dictated  by me. But are 
there cleverer ways to  get people to monitor  their own  spend­
ing?  A  few  years  ago,  for  instance,  I  heard  about  the  "ice  
glass"  method  for  reducing  credit  card  spending.  It's  a  home  
remedy  for impulsive spending.  You put  your  credit card  into  
a  glass of water  and  put  the  glass  in  the  freezer. Then,  when  
you  impulsively  decide  to  make  a  purchase,  you  must  first  
wait  for  the  ice to  thaw  before  extracting  the  card.  By then, 
your  compulsion  to  purchase  has  subsided.  (You can't  just  
put  the  card  in  the  microwave, of course, because then  you'd  
destroy  the magnetic strip.) 
But  here's  another  approach  that  is arguably  better,  and  
certainly  more  up-to-date.  John  Leland  wrote  a  very  inter­
esting article in  the  New   York    Times   in  which  he  described  
a  growing  trend  of  self-shame:  "When  a  woman  who  calls  
herself  Tricia  discovered  last  week  that  she  owed  $22,302  
on  her  credit  cards,  she  could  not  wait  to  spread  the  news.  
Tricia,  29, does  not  talk  to  her  family  or  friends  about  her  
finances,  and  says  she  is ashamed  of her  personal  debt. Yet 
from  the  laundry  room  of her  home  in  northern  Michigan,  
Tricia  does  something  that  would  have  been  unthinkable—  
and   impossible—a  generation   ago:  She  goes  online   and   
posts  intimate  details  of her  financial  life,  including  her  net  
worth   (now  a  negative  $38,691),  the  balance  and  finance  
charges  on  her  credit cards,  and  the  amount  of debt  she  has  
paid  down  ($15,312)  since starting  the  blog about  her  debt  
last  year."  
It  is also clear that  Tricia's blog  is part  of  a  larger  trend.  
Apparently,  there  are  dozens  of Web  sites  (maybe  there  are  
122 

the  problem   of  procrastination  and   self-control   
thousands  by  now)  devoted  to  the  same  kind  of  debt  Hog­
ging   (from   "Poorer   than   You"  poorerthanyou.com    and    
"We're  in Debt" wereindebt.com  to  "Make Love Not  Debt"  
makelovenotdebt.com   and   Tricia's  Web  page:  blogginga-
waydebt.com). Leland noted,  "Consumers  are  asking  others  
to  help  themselves  develop   self-control  because  so   many   
companies  are not  showing  any  restraint."
6   
Blogging about  overspending  is important  and  useful,  but  
as  we  saw  in  the  last  chapter,  on  emotions,  what  we  truly  
need  is a method  to  curb  our  consumption  at  the  moment of 
temptation,  rather  than  a  way  to  complain  about  it  after  the  
fact. 
What  could  we do? Could  we create something that  repli­
cated the conditions of Gaurav's  class, with  some freedom of 
choice  but  built-in  boundaries  as  well? I began  to  imagine  a  
credit card of a different  kind—a  self-control     credit card  that  
would  let  people  restrict  their  own  spending  behavior.  The  
users  could decide in  advance  how  much  money  they  wanted  
to  spend  in  each  category,  in  every  store,  and  in  every  time  
frame.  For instance, users  could  limit  their  spending  on  cof­
fee to $20 every week, and  their spending  on clothing to  $600  
every  six months.  Cardholders  could  fix  their  limit  for  gro­
ceries  at  $200  a  week  and  their  entertainment  spending  at  
$60  a month,  and  not  allow  any  spending  on  candy  between  
two  and  five PM. What  would  happen  if they  surpassed  the  
limit?  The  cardholders  would  select  their  penalties.  For  in­
stance,  they  could  make  the  card  get  rejected; or  they  could  
tax  themselves and  transfer  the tax to Habitat  for  Humanity,  
a  friend,  or  long-term  savings. This system  could  also imple­
ment  the  "ice glass" method  as  a cooling-off  period  for  large  
items;  and  it  could  even  automatically  trigger  an  e-mail  to  
your  spouse, your  mother, or  a  friend:  
123 

predictably   irrational   
Dear Sumi, 
This  e-mail  is to draw your  attention  to the  fact  that  
your  husband,  Dan  Ariely, who  is generally an  upright  
citizen, has exceeded his spending  limit on  chocolate of 
$50 per  month  by  $73.25.  
With  best wishes, 
The  self-control credit card  team  
Now  this  may  sound  like a pipe dream,  but  it isn't. Think 
about  the  potential  of  Smart  Cards  (thin,  palm-size  cards  
that  carry  impressive  computational  powers), which  are  be­
ginning  to  fill the market. These cards  offer  the possibility of 
being customized  to  each  individual's  credit  needs  and  help­
ing  people  manage  their  credit  wisely. Why  couldn't  a  card,  
for  instance,  have  a  spending  "governor"  (like  the  governors  
that  limit the  top  speed  on  engines) to  limit monetary  trans­
actions  in  particular  conditions? Why couldn't  they  have  the  
financial  equivalent  of  a  time-release pill, so  that  consumers  
could  program  their  cards  to  dispense  their  credit  to  help  
them  behave as they  hope  they  would?  
A  FEW  YEARS  ago  I  was  so  convinced  that  a  "self-control"  
credit  card  was  a  good  idea  that  I asked  for  a  meeting  with  
one  of the  major  banks.  To  my  delight,  this  venerable  bank  
responded,  and  suggested  that  I come to  its corporate  head­
quarters  in New  York.  
I  arrived  in New  York  a  few  weeks later,  and  after  a  brief  
delay at the reception desk, was led into  a modern  conference  
room.  Peering through  the  plate  glass  from  on  high,  I could 
look  down  on Manhattan's  financial district  and  a stream of 
yellow  cabs pushing  through  the  rain.  Within  a  few  minutes  
124 

the  problem   of  procrastination  and   self-control   
125 
the  room  had  filled with  half  a dozen  high-powered  banking  
executives,  including  the  head  of the  bank's  credit  card  divi­
sion. 
I  began  by  describing  how  procrastination  causes  every­
one  problems.  In  the  realm  of  personal  finance,  I  said,  it  
causes  us  to  neglect  our  savings—while  the  temptation  of  
easy  credit  fills  our  closets  with  goods  that  we  really  don't  
need.  It  didn't  take  long  before  I  saw  that  I  was  striking  a  
very personal  chord  with  each of them. 
Then  I began  to  describe how  Americans  have  fallen  into  
a  terrible  dependence  on  credit  cards,  how  the  debt  is  eating  
them  alive, and  how  they  are struggling  to  find  their  way  out  
of  this predicament.  America's seniors are one of the  hardest-
hit  groups.  In  fact,  from  1992 to  2004  the  rate  of  debt  of  
Americans  age 55 and  over rose faster  than  that  of any  other  
group.  Some of them  were  even  using  credit  cards  to  fill  the  
gaps  in  their  Medicare.  Others  were  at  risk  of  losing  their  
homes. 
I began to  feel like George Bailey begging for loan forgive­
ness  in  It s a  Wonderful      Life.   The  executives began  to  speak  
up. Most of them  had  stories of relatives, spouses, and  friends  
(not themselves, of course) who had had problems with  credit  
debt. We talked  it over. 
Now  the  ground  was  ready  and  I  started  describing  the  
self-control  credit card idea as a way to help consumers  spend  
less  and  save  more.  At  first  I  think  the  bankers  were  a  bit  
stunned.  I  was  suggesting  that  they  help  consumers  control  
their  spending.  Did  I realize that  the  bankers  and  credit  card  
companies  made  $17  billion  a  year  in  interest  from   these   
cards? Hello? They should  give that  up?  
Well,  I wasn't  that  naive.  I explained  to  the  bankers  that  
there  was  a  great  business  proposition  behind  the  idea  of  a  

predictably   irrational   
self-control  card.  "Look,"  I said,  "the  credit  card  business  is  
cutthroat.  You send  out  six billion direct-mail  pieces  a  year,  
and  all the  card  offers  are  about  the same." Reluctantly, they 
agreed. "But suppose  one credit card company  stepped  out of 
the pack,"  I continued,  "and  identified  itself  as  a good  guy—  
as  an  advocate  for  the  credit-crunched  consumer?  Suppose  
one company  had  the guts to  offer  a card that would  actually  
help  consumers  control  their  credit,  and  better  still,  divert  
some  of  their   money   into   long-term   savings?"  I  glanced  
around  the  room.  "My  bet  is  that  thousands  of  consumers  
would   cut  up  their  other  credit  cards—and   sign  up   with   
you!" 
A wave of excitement crossed the room. The bankers  nod­
ded  their  heads  and  chatted  to  one  another.  It  was  revolu­
tionary!  Soon  thereafter   we  all  departed.  They  shook  my  
hand warmly  and  assured  me that we would  be talking  again,  
soon. 
Well,  they  never  called me  back.  (It might  have  been  that  
they  were  worried  about  losing  the  $17  billion  in  interest  
charges,  or  maybe  it was  just good  old  procrastination.)  But  
the  idea  is still there—a  self-control credit card—and  maybe  
one day  someone will take the next  step.  
126 

CHAPTER      7      
The  High  Price  
of  Ownership  
Why  We Overvalue   What  We  Have  
t  Duke  University,  basketball  is  somewhere  between  a  
i\passionate  hobby  and  a  religious  experience. The  bas­
ketball  stadium  is small  and  old  and  has  bad  acoustics—the  
kind  that  turn  the  cheers  of  the  crowd  into  thunder   and   
pump  everyone's  adrenaline   level  right  through   the   roof.   
The small size of the stadium  creates intimacy but  also  means  
there  are  not  enough  seats  to  contain  all the  fans  who  want  
to  attend  the  games. This,  by the  way,  is how  Duke  likes  it,  
and  the  university  has  expressed  little  interest  in  exchang­
ing  the  small,  intimate  stadium  for  a  larger  one.  To  ration  
the  tickets,  an  intricate  selection  process  has  been  devel­
oped  over the  years, to  separate  the  truly  devoted  fans  from  
all  the  rest.  
Even before  the  start  of the  spring  semester,  students  who  
want  to  attend  the  games  pitch  tents  in  the  open  grassy  area  

predictably   irrational   
outside  the  stadium.  Each  tent  holds  up  to  10 students.  The  
campers  who  arrive  first  take  the  spots  closest  to  the  stadi­
um's  entrance,  and  the  ones  who  come  later  line  up  farther  
back. The  evolving community  is called Krzyzewskiville, re­
flecting  the  respect  the  students   have  for  Coach  K—Mike  
Krzyzewski—as  well  as  their  aspirations  for  victory  in  the  
coming  season.  
So  that  the  serious  basketball  fans  are  separated   from   
those  without  "Duke  blue"  running  through  their  veins,  an  
air  horn  is sounded  at  random  times. At the  sound,  a  count­
down  begins,  and  within  the  next  five  minutes  at  least  one  
person  from  each  tent  must  check in  with  the  basketball  au­
thorities.  If a  tent  fails  to  register  within  these  five  minutes,  
the  whole  tent  gets  bumped  to  the  end  of the  line. This  pro­
cedure  continues  for  most  of the  spring  semester,  and  inten­
sifies  in  the  last 48 hours  before  a  game.  
At that  point,  48 hours  before  a game, the  checks become 
"personal  checks." From  then  on,  the  tents  are  merely  a  so­
cial  structure:  when  the  air  horn  is  sounded,  every   student   
has  to  check  in  personally  with  the  basketball   authorities.   
Missing  an  "occupancy  check"  in  these  final  two  days  can  
mean  being  bumped  to  the  end  of the  line. Although  the  air  
horn   sounds   occasionally  before  routine  games,  it  can  be  
heard  at  all hours  of night  and  day  before  the  really  big con­
tests  (such as games against the University of North  Carolina-
Chapel  Hill  and  during the  national  championships).  
But  that's  not  the  oddest  part  of  the  ritual.  The  oddest  
part  is  that  for  the  really  important  games,  such  as  the  na­
tional  titles, the  students  at the  front  of the  line still don't  get  
a  ticket.  Rather,  each  of  them  gets  a  lottery  number.  Only  
later,  as  they  crowd  around   a  list  of  winners  posted  at  the  
128 

the  high  price  of   ownership   
student  center, do  they  find  out  if they  have  really, truly  won  
a ticket to the  coveted game. 
As  Ziv  CARMON  (a professor  at  INSEAD)  and  I listened  to  
the  air  horn  during  the  campout  at  Duke  in  the  spring  of  
1994,  we were intrigued  by the  real-life experiment  going  on  
before  our  eyes.  All  the  students   who  were  camping   out   
wanted  passionately  to  go  to  the  basketball  game. They  had  
all camped  out  for  a long time for the privilege. But when  the  
lottery  was  over, some of them  would  become ticket  owners,  
while others  would  not.  
The  question  was  this:  would  the  students  who  had  won  
tickets—who  had  ownership  of  tickets—value  those  tickets  
more  than  the  students  who  had  not  won  them  even  though  
they all "worked"  equally hard  to obtain them? On the basis of 
Jack  Knetsch, Dick  Thaler,  and  Daniel  Kahneman's  research  
on  the  "endowment  effect,"  we  predicted  that  when  we  own  
something—whether  it's a car or  a violin, a cat or  a basketball 
ticket—we begin to value it more than  other people  do.  
Think  about  this  for  a  minute.  Why  does  the  seller of  a  
house  usually  value  that  property   more  than  the  potential  
buyer? Why does the seller of an automobile envision  a higher 
price  than  the  buyer?  In  many  transactions  why  does  the  
owner  believe that  his possession  is worth  more  money  than  
the  potential  owner  is willing to  pay? There's  an  old  saying,  
"One man's ceiling is another  man's floor." Well, when  you're  
the  owner,  you're  at  the  ceiling; and  when  you're  the  buyer,  
you're  at the  floor.  
To  be sure, that  is not  always the case.  I have  a friend  who  
contributed  a  full  box of record  albums  to  a  garage  sale, for 
129 

predictably  irrational  
instance,  simply   because  he  couldn't   stand   hauling   them   
around  any  longer. The  first  person  who  came  along  offered  
him  $25 for  the  whole  box  (without  even  looking  at  the  ti­
tles),  and   my  friend   accepted  it.  The  buyer  probably   sold   
them  for  10 times  that  price  the  following  day.  Indeed,  if we 
always  overvalued   what   we  had,  there  would   be  no   such   
thing  as  Antiques     Roadshow.      ("How  much  did  you  pay  for  
this  powder   horn?  Five  dollars?  Well,  let  me  tell  you,  you  
have  a national  treasure  here.")  
But  this  caveat  aside,  we  still  believed  that  in  general  the  
ownership  of  something  increases  its  value  in  the   owner's   
eyes. Were  we  right?  Did  the  students  at  Duke  who  had  won  
the   tickets—who   could   now   anticipate   experiencing   the   
packed  stands  and  the  players  racing across the  court—value  
them  more  than  the  students  who  had  not  won  them?  There  
was  only  one  good  way  to  find  out:  get  them  to  tell  us  how  
much  they  valued  the tickets. 
In this case, Ziv and  I would  try to buy tickets from  some of 
the  students  who  had  won  them—and  sell them  to those  who  
didn't. That's right;  we were  about  to become ticket scalpers. 
THAT  NIGHT  WE  got  a  list  of the  students  who  had  won  the  
lottery  and  those  who  hadn't,  and  we  started   telephoning.   
Our  first  call  was to William, a senior majoring  in  chemistry.  
William  was  rather   busy.  After  camping  for  the   previous   
week,  he  had  a  lot  of homework  and  e-mail  to  catch  up  on.  
He  was  not  too  happy,   either,  because  after  reaching   the   
front  of the  line,  he  was  still  not  one  of the  lucky  ones  who  
had  won  a ticket  in the  lottery.  
"Hi,  William," I said.  "I understand  you didn't  get one of 
the  tickets for  the  final  four."  
130 

the  high  price  of   ownership   
"That's  right."  
"We  may  be able to  sell you  a ticket." 
"Cool." 
"How  much  would  you  be willing to  pay  for one?" 
"How  about  a hundred dollars?" he  replied.  
"Too  low," I laughed.  "You'll  have to  go  higher."  
"A hundred  fifty?"  he  offered.  
"You  have  to  do  better,"  I  insisted.  "What's  the  highest  
price you'll pay?" 
William thought  for  a moment.  "A hundred  seventy-five."  
"That's it?" 
"That's  it. Not  a penny  more."  
"OK,  you're  on  the  list. I'll let you  know,"  I said.  "By the 
way, how'd  you come up  with  that  hundred seventy-five?" 
William  said  he  figured  that  for  $175 he could  also  watch  
the game at a sports bar, free, spend  some money on beer  and  
food,  and  still have  a lot left  over for  a few CDs or  even  some  
shoes. The  game  would  no  doubt  be exciting, he  said,  but  at  
the  same time  $175  is a lot of money. 
Our next call was to Joseph. After camping out  for  a week 
Joseph  was  also  behind  on  his  schoolwork.  But  he  didn't  
care—he  had  won  a  ticket  in  the  lottery  and  now,  in  a  few  
days,  he  would  be  watching  the  Duke  players  fight  for  the  
national title. 
"Hi,  Joseph,"  I  said.  "We  may  have  an  opportunity   for   
you—to  sell your  ticket. What's your  minimum price?" 
"I  don't  have one." 
"Everyone  has  a price,"  I replied,  giving the  comment  my  
best Al Pacino tone. 
His  first  answer  was  $3,000.  
"Come  on,"  I said, "That's  way too  much. Be reasonable; 
you  have to  offer  a lower price." 
131 

predictably   irrational   
"All right,"  he said,  "twenty-four  hundred."  
"Are you sure?" I asked. 
"That's  as low  as I'll go." 
"OK.  If I can  find  a buyer  at that  price, I'll give you  a  call.  
By  the  way,"  I  added,  "how   did  you  come  up  with   that   
price?" 
"Duke  basketball  is  a  huge  part  of  my  life  here,"  he  said  
passionately. He then  went on to explain that  the game  would  
be a defining  memory of his time  at Duke, an  experience that 
he would  pass on to his children  and  grandchildren.  "So how 
can  you  put  a price on that?"  he asked.  "Can  you  put  a price 
on memories?" 
William  and  Joseph  were  just  two  of more  than  100 stu­
dents  whom  we  called. In  general,  the  students  who  did  not  
own  a  ticket  were  willing  to  pay  around  $170 for  one.  The  
price they  were willing to  pay,  as  in William's case,  was  tem­
pered  by  alternative  uses  for  the  money  (such  as  spending  it  
in  a  sports  bar  for  drinks  and  food).  Those  who  owned  a  
ticket, on the other hand,  demanded  about $2,400 for it. Like 
Joseph,  they  justified  their  price  in  terms  of the  importance  
of  the experience and  the  lifelong memories it would  create.  
What  was  really  surprising,  though,  was  that  in  all  our  
phone  calls, not  a single person  was willing to sell a ticket at a 
price that  someone else was willing to pay. What did  we have? 
We  had  a group  of students  all hungry  for  a basketball ticket 
before  the  lottery  drawing;   and  then,  bang—in  an  instant  
after  the  drawing,  they  were  divided  into two  groups—ticket  
owners  and  non-ticket  owners.  It  was  an  emotional  chasm  
that  was formed,  between  those who  now  imagined  the  glory  
of  the  game,  and  those  who  imagined  what  else  they  could  
buy with the price of the ticket. And  it was an empirical chasm 
as  well—the  average  selling  price  (about  $2,400)  was  sepa-
132 

the  high  price  of   ownership   
rated  by  a  factor  of  about  14 from  the  average  buyer's  offer  
(about  $175).  
From  a  rational  perspective,  both  the  ticket  holders  and  
the  non-ticket  holders  should  have  thought  of  the  game  in  
exactly the same way. After all, the anticipated  atmosphere  at  
the game and  the enjoyment one could expect from  the expe­
rience  should  not  depend  on  winning  a  lottery.  Then  how  
could  a  random  lottery  drawing  have  changed  the  students'  
view of the game—and  the  value of the tickets—so  dramati­
cally? 
OWNERSHIP    PERVADES   OUR  lives  and,   in  a  strange   way,   
shapes  many  of the  things  we  do.  Adam  Smith  wrote,  "Ev­
ery  man  [and  woman]  .  .  . lives  by  exchanging,  or  becomes  
in  some  measure  a merchant,  and  the  society itself  grows  to  
be  what  is  properly  a  commercial  society." That's  an  awe­
some thought.  Much of our  life  story can  be told  by describ­
ing the ebb and  flow of our particular  possessions—what  we  
get and  what  we  give up.  We buy  clothes and  food,  automo­
biles  and  homes,  for  instance.  And  we  sell things  as  well—  
homes  and  cars, and  in  the  course of our  careers, our  time.  
Since  so  much  of  our   lives  is  dedicated  to   ownership,   
wouldn't   it  be  nice  to  make  the  best  decisions  about  this?  
Wouldn't  it be nice, for instance, to know  exactly how  much  
we would  enjoy  a new home,  a new  car, a different  sofa,  and  
an  Armani  suit,  so  that  we  could  make  accurate  decisions  
about  owning  them?  Unfortunately,  this  is  rarely  the  case.  
We  are  mostly  fumbling  around  in  the  dark.  Why? Because 
of  three irrational  quirks  in our  human  nature.  
The  first  quirk,  as  we  saw  in  the  case  of  the  basketball  
tickets,  is  that  we  fall  in  love  with  what  we  already  have.  
133 

predictably   irrational   
Suppose  you  decide  to  sell your  old VW  bus.  What  do  you  
start  doing?  Even  before  you've  put  a  FOR  SALE  sign  in  the  
window,  you  begin  to  recall trips  you  took.  You were  much  
younger,  of course; the  kids  hadn't  sprouted  into  teenagers.  
A  warm  glow  of remembrance  washes  over  you  and  the  car.  
This  applies  not  only  to VW  buses, of course,  but  to  every­
thing  else. And  it can happen  fast.  
For   instance,  two  of  my  friends   adopted   a  child   from   
China and  told me this remarkable story. They went to China 
with  12 other couples. When they reached thé orphanage,  the  
director  took  each of the  couples  separately  into  a  room  and  
presented  them  with  a  daughter.  When  the  couples  recon­
vened  the  following  morning,  they  all commented  on  the  di­
rector's wisdom:  Somehow she knew  exactly which  little girl 
to  give to each couple. The matches were perfect. My  friends  
felt the  same way, but  they  also realized that  the  matches  had  
been  random.  What  made  each  match  seem  perfect  was  not  
the  Chinese  woman's  talent,  but  nature's  ability  to  make  us  
instantly  attached  to what  we  have.  
The  second  quirk  is  that  we  focus  on  what  we  may  lose,  
rather  than  what  we  may  gain.  When  we  price  our  beloved  
VW,  therefore,  we think  more about  what  we will lose (the use 
of  the  bus)  than  what  we  will  gain  (money  to  buy  something  
else).  Likewise, the  ticket  holder  focuses  on  losing the  basket­
ball experience, rather than  imagining the enjoyment of obtain­
ing  money  or  on  what  can  be purchased  with  it. Our  aversion  
to  loss  is  a  strong  emotion,  and  as  I  will  explain  later  in  the  
book, one that  sometimes causes us to make bad  decisions. Do 
you  wonder  why  we  often  refuse  to  sell some of our  cherished  
clutter,  and  if somebody  offers  to  buy  it,  we  attach  an exorbi­
tant  price tag to  it? As soon  as we begin thinking  about  giving  
up  our  valued possessions, we are already  mourning  the  loss.  
134 

the  high  price  of   ownership   
135 
The third  quirk  is that  we assume other people will see the 
transaction  from  the same perspective as we do. We somehow 
expect  the  buyer  of our VW to  share  our  feelings, emotions, 
and  memories. Or  we expect the  buyer of our  house to  appre­
ciate  how  the  sunlight  filters  through  the  kitchen  windows.  
Unfortunately,  the  buyer  of the VW  is  more  likely to  notice  
the  puff  of smoke  that  is emitted  as  you  shift  from  first  into  
second;  and  the  buyer  of your  house  is  more  likely to  notice  
the strip of black mold in the corner. It is just difficult  for us to 
imagine  that  the  person  on  the  other  side of the  transaction,  
buyer  or seller, is not  seeing the world  as we see it. 
OWNERSHIP  ALSO  HAS  what  I'd  call  "peculiarities." For one, 
the  more  work  you  put  into  something,  the  more  ownership  
you  begin to  feel  for  it. Think  about  the last time  you  assem­
bled  some  furniture.   Figuring  out  which  piece  goes  where  
and  which  screw  fits  into  which  hole  boosts  the  feeling of 
ownership. 
In fact,  I can  say with  a fair amount  of certainty that  pride  
of  ownership  is inversely proportional  to the ease with  which  
one assembles the furniture;  wires the high-density  television  
to  the  surround-sound  system;  installs  software;  or  gets  the  
baby  into  the  bath,  dried,  powdered,  diapered,  and  tucked  
away  in  the  crib. My  friend  and  colleague Mike  Norton  (a  
professor  at Harvard)  and  I have a term for this  phenomenon:  
the "Ikea  effect."  
Another peculiarity  is that  we can begin to  feel  ownership  
even  before  we  own  something.  Think  about  the  last  time  
you  entered  an  online  auction.  Suppose  you  make  your  first  
bid  on  Monday  morning,  for  a wristwatch,  and  at  this  point  
you  are the highest  bidder. That  night  you  log on, and  you're  

predictably   irrational   
still the  top  dog. Ditto for the  next night.  You start  thinking  
about  that  elegant watch.  You imagine  it  on  your  wrist;  you  
imagine  the  compliments you'll  get. And  then  you  go online 
again  one  hour  before  the  end  of the  auction.  Some dog  has  
topped  your  bid! Someone else will take  your  watch! So you 
increase your  bid beyond what  you had  originally planned. 
Is the feeling of partial  ownership  causing the upward  spi­
ral we often  see in online auctions? Is it the case that  the lon­
ger  an  auction  continues, the  greater  grip  virtual  ownership  
will  have  on  the  various  bidders  and  the  more  money  they  
will spend? A few years ago, James Heyman, Yesim Orhun  (a  
professor  at  the  University of  Chicago),  and  I  set  up  an  ex­
periment to explore how the duration  of an auction  gradually  
affects  the  auction's participants  and  encourages them  to  bid  
to the bitter end. As we suspected, the participants  who  were  
the  highest  bidders,  for  the  longest periods  of time, ended  up  
with  the  strongest  feelings  of  virtual  ownership.  Of course, 
they were in a vulnerable position: once they thought  of them­
selves  as owners, they  were  compelled to  prevent  losing their 
position  by bidding  higher and  higher.  
"Virtual  ownership,"  of course,  is  one  mainspring  of  the  
advertising industry.  We see a happy  couple driving down  the  
California  coastline in  a BMW convertible, and  we  imagine  
ourselves there. We get a catalog of hiking clothing from Pata­
gonia,  see  a  polyester  fleece  pullover,  and—poof—we   start   
thinking  of it  as ours. The trap  is set, and  we  willingly walk 
in. We become partial  owners  even before we own  anything.  
There's  another  way  that  we  can  get  drawn  into  own­
ership.  Often,  companies will have  "trial" promotions. If we 
have  a  basic  cable  television  package,  for  instance,  we  are  
lured  into  a  "digital  gold  package"  by  a  special  "trial"  rate  
(only $59 a month  instead of the usual  $89).  After all, we tell 
136 

the  high  price  of   ownership   
ourselves, we can always go back to basic cable or  downgrade  
to the  "silver package." 
But once we try the gold package, of course, we claim own­
ership  of  it.  Will  we  really  have  the  strength  to   downgrade   
back  to  basic or  even to  "digital  silver"? Doubtful.  At the  on­
set,  we  may  think  that  we  can  easily return  to  the  basic  ser­
vice,  but  once we are comfortable with  the  digital picture,  we  
begin to  incorporate  our  ownership  of it into  our  view of the 
world  and  ourselves,  and  quickly  rationalize  away  the  addi­
tional price. More than  that,  our  aversion to loss—the loss of 
that  nice  crisp  "gold  package"  picture  and  the  extra  chan­
nels—is  too  much  for  us  to  bear.  In  other  words,  before  we  
make  the  switch  we  may  not  be  certain  that  the  cost  of  the  
digital  gold package  is worth  the  full  price; but  once we  have  
it, the  emotions of ownership  come welling  up,  to  tell  us  that  
the  loss of "digital  gold"  is more  painful  than  spending  a  few  
more  dollars  a  month.  We  may  think  we  can  turn  back,  but  
that  is actually much  harder  than  we expected. 
Another  example of the  same hook  is the  "30-day money-
back guarantee."  If we are not  sure whether  or not  we  should  
get  a  new  sofa,  the  guarantee  of  being  able  to  change  our  
mind  later  may push  us over the hump so that  we end  up  get­
ting  it.  We  fail  to  appreciate  how  our  perspective  will  shift  
once  we  have  it  at  home,  and  how  we  will  start  viewing  the  
sofa—as  ours—and  consequently  start  viewing  returning  it  
as a loss. We might think  we are taking  it home  only to try  it  
out  for  a  few  days,  but  in  fact  we  are  becoming owners  of it 
and  are  unaware  of the  emotions the  sofa can  ignite in  us.  
OWNERSHIP   IS  NOT  limited  to  material  things.  It  can  also  
apply  to  points  of  view.  Once  we  take  ownership   of  an  
137 

predictably   irrational   
idea—whether  it's about  politics or  sports—what  do  we  do?  
We  love  it  perhaps  more  than  we  should.  We  prize  it  more  
than  it is worth.  And  most  frequently,  we have trouble  letting  
go  of it  because we  can't  stand  the  idea  of its  loss. What  are  
we  left  with  then? An  ideology—rigid  and  unyielding.  
THERE  IS  NO  known  cure for the  ills of ownership.  As  Adam  
Smith  said,  it  is  woven  into  our  lives.  But  being  aware  of  it  
might  help.  Everywhere  around  us  we  see the  temptation  to  
improve  the  quality  of our  lives  by  buying  a  larger  home,  a  
second car, a new dishwasher,  a lawn  mower, and  so on. But, 
once we change our  possessions we have  a very hard  time go­
ing back down.  As I noted  earlier, ownership  simply  changes  
our   perspective.  Suddenly,  moving  backward   to  our   pre-
ownership  state  is  a  loss,  one  that  we cannot  abide.  And  so,  
while  moving  up  in  life,  we  indulge  ourselves  with  the  fan­
tasy that  we can  always ratchet  ourselves back if need be; but 
in  reality, we  can't.  Downgrading  to  a  smaller  home,  for  in­
stance,  is experienced  as  a  loss,  it  is psychologically  painful,  
and  we  are  willing to  make  all kinds  of sacrifices  in  order  to  
avoid  such  losses—even  if,  in  this  case,  the  monthly  mort­
gage sinks our  ship.  
My  own  approach  is to  try  to  view  all transactions  (par­
ticularly  large  ones)  as  if  I  were  a  nonowner,  putting  some  
distance  between  myself  and  the  item  of interest.  In  this  at­
tempt,  I'm  not  certain  if  I  have  achieved  the  uninterest  in  
material  things  that  is espoused  by  the  Hindu  sannyasi,  but  
at  least I try  to  be as Zen  as  I can  about  it.  
138 

CHAPTER      8      
Keeping Doors  Open  
Why  Options  Distract   Us   from   
Our  Main    Objective    
I
n 210 BC, a Chinese commander  named  Xiang Yu led  his  
troops  across the  Yangtze River to  attack  the  army  of  the  
Qin  (Ch'in) dynasty. Pausing on the banks of the river for  the  
night,  his  troops  awakened  in  the  morning  to  find,  to  their  
horror,  that  their  ships  were  burning.  They  hurried  to  their  
feet  to  fight  off  their  attackers,  but  soon  discovered  that  it  
was  Xiang Yu  himself  who  had  set  their  ships  on  fire,  and  
that  he had  also ordered  all the cooking pots  crushed.  
Xiang  Yu explained  to  his  troops  that  without  the  pots  
and  the  ships, they had  no other choice but  to  fight their  way  
to  victory or  perish.  That  did  not  earn  Xiang Yu a place  on  
the  Chinese  army's  list  of  favorite  commanders,  but  it  did  
have  a  tremendous  focusing  effect  on  his  troops:  grabbing  
their  lances  and  bows,  they  charged  ferociously  against  the  
enemy  and  won  nine  consecutive battles, completely obliter­
ating the  main-force units  of the Qin  dynasty.  
Xiang  Yu's  story  is  remarkable  because  it  is  completely  

predictably   irrational   
antithetical to normal  human  behavior. Normally, we cannot 
stand  the  idea  of closing the  doors  on  our  alternatives.  Had  
most  of  us  been  in  Xiang  Yu's  armor,  in  other  words,  we  
would  have sent out part of our  army to tend to the ships, just 
in case we needed  them  for retreat;  and  we would  have  asked  
others to cook meals, just in case the  army  needed  to  stay  put  
for  a  few  weeks.  Still  others  would  have  been  instructed  to  
pound  rice  out  into  paper   scrolls,  just  in  case  we  needed  
parchment  on  which  to  sign the terms of the  surrender  of the 
mighty  Qin  (which was  highly unlikely  in the  first  place).  
In  the  context of today's  world,  we work  just  as feverishly 
to  keep  all  our  options  open.  We  buy  the  expandable  com­
puter  system, just in case we need all those high-tech bells and 
whistles.  We buy  the  insurance  policies that  are  offered  with  
the plasma high-definition  television, just in case the big screen 
goes  blank.  We  keep  our  children  in  every  activity  we  can  
imagine—just  in case one  sparks  their  interest  in gymnastics, 
piano,  French,  organic  gardening,  or  tae  kwon  do.  And  we  
buy  a  luxury  SUV, not  because  we  really expect to  drive off 
the  highway,  but  because just  in  case we do,  we want  to  have  
some clearance beneath  our axles. 
We  might  not  always  be  aware  of it,  but  in  every  case we 
give something  up  for  those  options.  We end  up  with  a com­
puter  that  has  more  functions  than  we need, or  a stereo  with  
an  unnecessarily  expensive warranty.  And  in  the  case of  our  
kids,  we  give  up  their  time  and  ours—and  the  chance  that  
they  could  become really  good  at  one  activity—in  trying  to  
give  them  some  experience  in  a  large  range  of  activities. In 
running  back  and  forth  among  the  things  that  might  be  im­
portant,  we  forget  to  spend  enough  time  on  what  really  is  
important.  It's a fool's game, and  one that  we are  remarkably  
adept  at  playing.  
140 

keeping   doors   open   
I  saw  this  precise  problem  in  one  of  my  undergraduate  
students,  an extremely talented  young  man  named Joe.  As  an  
incoming junior, Joe had  just completed  his required  courses,  
and  now  he had  to choose  a major.  But which  one? He  had  a  
passion  for architecture—he  spent  his weekends  studying  the  
eclectically  designed  buildings  around  Boston. He  could  see  
himself  as a designer of such proud structures  one day. At  the  
same  time  he  liked  computer  science, particularly  the  free­
dom  and  flexibility that  the  field  offered.  He  could  see  him­
self  with   a  good-paying   job  at   an  exciting  company   like   
Google.  His  parents   wanted   him   to  become  a   computer   
scientist—and  besides,  who  goes  to MIT  to  be  an  architect  
anyway?* Still, his  love of architecture  was  strong.  
As  Joe  spoke,  he  wrung  his  hands  in  frustration.   The   
classes  he  needed  for  majors  in  computer  science and  archi­
tecture  were  incompatible.  For  computer  science, he  needed  
Algorithms,  Artificial  Intelligence, Computer  Systems En­
gineering,   Circuits   and   Electronics,  Signals  and   Systems,   
Computational  Structures,  and  a laboratory  in  Software  En­
gineering.  For  architecture,  he  needed  different  courses: Ex­
periencing  Architecture  Studio,  Foundations   in  the  Visual  
Arts,  Introduction  to  Building  Technology,  Introduction   to   
Design  Computing,  Introduction  to  the  History  and  Theory  
of  Architecture,  and  a further  set of architecture  studios.  
How  could  he  shut  the  door  on  one  career  or  the  other?  
If  he  started  taking  classes  in  computer  science, he  would  
have  a  hard  time  switching  over  to  architecture;  and  if  he  
started  in  architecture,  he  would  have  an  equally  difficult  
time  switching  to  computer  science. On  the  other  hand,  if  
he  signed  up  for  classes  in  both  disciplines,  he  would  most  
* The  architecture  department at MIT  is  in  fact  very  good.  
141 

predictably   irrational   
likely  end  up  without  a  degree  in  either  field  at  the  end of 
his  four  years  at  MIT,  and  he  would  require  another  year  
(paid  for  by his parents)  to complete his degree.  (He  eventu­
ally  graduated   with  a  degree  in  computer  science,  but  he  
found  the  perfect  blend  in  his  first  job—designing  nuclear  
subs  for  the  Navy.)  
Dana,  another  student  of mine, had  a similar  problem—  
but  hers  centered  on two  boyfriends.  She could dedicate  her  
energy  and  passion  to  a  person  she  had  met  recently  and,  
she hoped,  build  an  enduring  relationship  with  him.  Or  she  
could  continue  to  put  time  and  effort  into  a  previous  rela­
tionship  that  was  dying.  She clearly liked the  new  boyfriend  
better  than  the  former  one—yet  she  couldn't  let  the  earlier  
relationship  go. Meanwhile, her  new  boyfriend  was  getting  
restless.  "Do  you  really  want  to  risk  losing  the  boy  you  
love,"  I asked  her,  "for  the  remote  possibility that  you  may  
discover—at  some  later  date—that   you  love  your   former   
boyfriend  more?" She shook  her  head  "no,"  and  broke  into  
tears.* 
What  is it about  options that  is so difficult  for us? Why  do  
we  feel  compelled  to  keep  as  many  doors  open  as  possible,  
even  at  great  expense?  Why  can't  we  simply  commit  our­
selves?
1
" 
To  try  to  answer  these  questions, Jiwoong Shin  (a profes­
sor  at  Yale)  and  I  devised  a  series  of  experiments  that  we  
hoped  would  capture  the  dilemma  represented  by  Joe  and  
Dana.  In our  case, the experiment  would  be based  on  a com-
*I'm often  surprised by  how  much people  confide  in  me.  I think  it's partly  due  to  my  
scars,  and  to  the obvious  fact  that  I've been  through substantial trauma.  On  the other 
hand,  what  I would  like  to  believe  is  that  people  simply  recognize my  unique  insight  into  
the human psyche, and  thus  seek  my  advice. Either  way,  I learn  a lot  from the  stories  
people  share  with  me.  
^Matrimony  is  a social  device  that  would  seem  to  force individuals  to  shut down  their  
alternative  options,  but,  as we  know,  it too  doesn't  always  work.  
142 

keeping  doors   open   
puter  game that  we hoped  would  eliminate some of the com­
plexities  of  life  and  would  give  us  a  straightforward   answer   
about whether  people have a tendency to keep doors  open  for  
too  long.  We  called  it  the  "door  game."  For  a  location,  we  
chose  a  dark,  dismal  place—a  cavern  that  even  Xiang Yu's 
army  would  have  been  reluctant  to  enter.  
MIT's    EAST   CAMPUS   dormitory   is  a  daunting  place.  It  is  
home  to  the  hackers,  hardware   enthusiasts,  oddballs,   and   
general  misfits  (and  believe me—it  takes  a  serious  misfit  to  
be a misfit at MIT).  One hall allows loud  music, wild  parties,  
and  even public  nudity.  Another  is  a magnet  for  engineering  
students,  whose  models  of everything  from  bridges  to  roller  
coasters can  be found  everywhere.  (If you  ever visit this hall, 
press  the  "emergency pizza"  button,  and  a  short  time  later  a  
pizza  will  be  delivered  to  you.)  A  third  hall  is painted  com­
pletely  black.  A  fourth  has  bathrooms  adorned  with  murals  
of  various  kinds:  press  the  palm  tree  or  the  samba  dancer,  
and  music,  piped  in  from  the  hall's  music  server  (all  down­
loaded  legally, of course), comes on. 
One  afternoon  a  few  years  ago, Kim, one  of  my  research  
assistants,  roamed  the  hallways  of East  Campus  with  a  lap­
top  tucked  under  her  arm.  At  each  door  she  asked  the  stu­
dents  whether  they'd  like to  make  some money  participating  
in a quick experiment. When the reply was in the  affirmative,  
Kim  entered  the  room  and  found  (sometimes  only  with  dif­
ficulty)  an  empty  spot to place the  laptop.  
As  the  program  booted  up,  three  doors  appeared  on  the  
computer  screen:  one  red,  the  second  blue,  and  the   third   
green. Kim explained that  the participants  could enter  any of 
the  three  rooms  (red,  blue,  or  green)  simply  by  clicking  on  
143 

predictably   irrational   
the corresponding  door. Once they were in  a room, each sub­
sequent  click  would  earn  them  a certain  amount  of money. If 
a particular  room  offered  between  one cent and  10 cents, for 
instance, they would  make something  in that  range each time 
they  clicked  their  mouse  in  that  room.  The  screen  tallied  
their  earnings  as they  went  along.  
Getting  the  most  money  out  of  this  experiment  involved  
finding  the  room  with  the  biggest payoff  and  clicking in  it  as  
many  times  as possible. But this wasn't  trivial. Each time you 
moved  from  one room  to another,  you  used  up  one click  (you  
had  a total  of 100 clicks).  On  one  hand,  switching  from  one  
room  to another  might  be a good  strategy  for  finding  the big­
gest payout.  On  the other  hand,  running madly  from  door  to  
door  (and  room  to  room)  meant  that  you  were  burning  up  
clicks which  could  otherwise  have  made  you  money.  
Albert,  a  violin  player  (and  a  resident  of  the  Dark  Lord  
Krotus  worshippers'  hall),  was  one  of the  first  participants.  
He  was  a  competitive  type,  and  determined  to  make  more  
money than  anyone  else playing the game. For his  first  move,  
he chose the  red  door  and  entered  the  cube-shaped  room.  
Once  inside, he clicked the  mouse.  It  registered  3.5 cents. 
He  clicked again; 4.1 cents; a third  click  registered  one  cent.  
After  he sampled  a few  more of the rewards  in this room,  his  
interest  shifted  to  the  green  door.  He  clicked the  mouse  ea­
gerly and  went  in.  
Here  he was  rewarded  with  3.7 cents for  his  first  click;  he  
clicked  again  and  received 5.8 cents; he received 6.5 cents the 
third  time. At the  bottom  of the  screen his earnings  began  to  
grow. The green room  seemed better than  the red  room—but  
what  about  the  blue room? He  clicked to  go through  that  last  
unexplored  door.  Three  clicks  fell  in  the  range  of four  cents.  
Forget  it. He  hurried  back  to  the  green  door  (the  room  pay-
144 

keeping  doors   open   
ing  about  five  cents  a  click)  and  spent  the  remainder  of  his  
100  clicks  there,  increasing his  payoff.  At  the  end,  Albert  in­
quired  about  his score. Kim smiled as she told him  it was  one  
of  the  best so  far.  
ALBERT    HAD    CONFIRMED   something   that   we   suspected   
about  human  behavior:  given  a  simple  setup  and  a clear goal 
(in this case, to make money), all of us are quite  adept  at pur­
suing  the  source  of  our  satisfaction.  If you  were  to  express  
this  experiment  in  terms  of  dating,  Albert  had  essentially  
sampled  one  date,  tried  another,  and  even  had  a  fling  with  a  
third.  But  after  he  had  tried  the  rest,  he  went  back  to  the  
best—and  that's  where  he  stayed  for  the  remainder  of  the  
game. 
But  to  be  frank,  Albert  had  it  pretty  easy.  Even  while  he  
was  running  around  with  other  "dates,"  the  previous  ones  
waited  patiently  for  him  to return  to their  arms. But  suppose  
that  the  other  dates,  after  a period  of neglect, began  to  turn  
their  backs on  him?  Suppose  that  his  options  began  to  close  
down?  Would  Albert  let  them  go? Or  would  he  try  to  hang  
on to  all his options  for  as long as possible? In fact,  would  he  
sacrifice  some  of  his  guaranteed  payoffs  for  the  privilege of 
keeping these other  options alive? 
To  find  out,  we  changed  the  game.  This  time,  any  door  
left  unvisited  for  12 clicks would  disappear  forever.  
SAM,  A  RESIDENT  of the  hackers' hall,  was  our  first  partici­
pant  in the  "disappearing"  condition. He chose the  blue  door  
to  begin  with;  and  after  entering  it,  he  clicked three  times.  
His earnings  began  building  at the  bottom  of the  screen,  but  
145 

predictably   irrational   
this  wasn't  the  only  activity  that  caught  his  eye. With  each  
additional  click,  the  other  doors  diminished  by  one-twelfth,  
signifying  that  if  not  attended  to,  they  would  vanish.  Eight  
more  clicks and  they would  disappear  forever.  
Sam  wasn't  about  to  let that  happen.  Swinging his  cursor  
around,  he  clicked on  the  red  door,  brought  it  up  to  its  full  
size, and  clicked three  times inside the  red  room. But now  he  
noticed  the  green  door—it  was  four  clicks  from   disappear­
ing. Once again,  he  moved  his cursor, this  time  restoring  the  
green  door  to  its full  size.  
The  green  door  appeared   to  be  delivering  the  highest  
payout.  So should  he stay there? (Remember that  each  room  
had  a  range  of  payouts.  So  Sam  could  not  be  completely  
convinced  that  the  green  door  was  actually  the  best.  The  
blue  might  have  been  better,  or  perhaps  the  red,  or  maybe  
neither.)  With  a  frenzied  look  in  his  eye,  Sam  swung  his  
cursor   across  the   screen.  He   clicked  the   red   door   and   
watched  the  blue door  continue to shrink.  After  a few  clicks  
in the  red,  he jumped  over to the  blue. But by now  the  green  
was  beginning  to  get  dangerously   small—and   so  he  was  
back  there  next.  
Before  long, Sam was  racing  from  one  option  to  another,  
his body leaning tensely into the game. In  my mind  I pictured 
a  typically  harried  parent,  rushing  kids  from  one  activity  to  
the  next.  
Is  this  an  efficient  way  to  live our  lives—especially when 
another  door  or two  is added  every week? I can't  tell you  the  
answer  for  certain  in  terms  of your  personal  life,  but  in  our  
experiments  we  saw  clearly that  running  from  pillar  to  post  
was  not  only  stressful   but  uneconomical.  In  fact,  in  their  
frenzy  to  keep  doors  from  shutting,  our  participants  ended  
146 

keeping  doors   open   
up  making  substantially  less  money  (about  15 percent  less)  
than  the  participants  who  didn't  have  to  deal  with  closing  
doors.  The  truth  is that  they  could  have  made  more  money  
by picking a room—any  room—and  merely staying there  for  
the  whole  experiment!  (Think  about  that  in  terms  of  your  
life  or career.) 
When Jiwoong and  I tilted  the  experiments  against  keep­
ing options open, the results were still the same. For instance, 
we  made  each  click  opening  a  door  cost three  cents, so  that  
the  cost was  not  just the  loss of a  click  (an opportunity  cost)  
but  also  a  direct  financial  loss.  There  was  no  difference  in  
response  from  our  participants.  They still had  the  same  irra­
tional excitement about  keeping their  options  open.  
Then  we  told  the  participants  the  exact  monetary   out­
comes  they  could  expect  from  each  room.  The  results  were  
still  the  same. They  still could  not  stand  to  see  a door  close.  
Also,  we  allowed  some  participants  to  experience  hundreds  
of  practice trials  before  the  actual  experiment.  Certainly,  we  
thought,  they would  see the wisdom  of not  pursuing the  clos­
ing  doors.  But we  were  wrong.  Once  they  saw  their  options  
shrinking,  our  MIT  students—supposedly   among  the  best  
and  brightest of young people—could  not  stay focused. Peck­
ing  like  barnyard  hens  at  every  door,  they  sought  to  make  
more  money, and  ended  up  making  far  less.  
In the  end,  we tried  another  sort of experiment,  one  that  
smacked  of reincarnation.  In  this  condition,  a  door  would  
still  disappear  if  it  was  not  visited  within  12 clicks.  But  it  
wasn't  gone  forever.  Rather,  a  single  click  could  bring  it  
back  to  life.  In  other  words,  you  could  neglect  a door  with­
out  any  loss.  Would  this  keep  our  participants  from  click­
ing  on  it  anyhow?  No.  To  our  surprise,  they  continued  to  
147 

predictably  irrational  
waste  their  clicks  on  the  "reincarnating"  door,  even  though  
its   disappearance   had   no   real   consequences   and   could   
always  be  easily  reversed.  They  just  couldn't  tolerate  the  
idea  of the  loss,  and  so  they  did  whatever  was  necessary  to  
prevent  their  doors  from  closing.  
How   CAN WE unshackle  ourselves  from  this  irrational  im­
pulse  to  chase  worthless  options?  In  1941 the  philosopher  
Erich Fromm wrote  a book called  Escape    from    Freedom.     In     
a  modern  democracy, he said, people  are beset not  by  a lack 
of  opportunity,   but  by  a  dizzying  abundance  of  it.  In  our  
modern  society this  is emphatically  so. We  are  continually  
reminded  that  we can do  anything  and  be anything  we  want  
to  be. The  problem  is  in  living  up  to  this  dream.  We  must  
develop  ourselves  in  every  way  possible;  must  taste  every  
aspect of life;  must  make  sure that  of the  1,000 things  to see 
before  dying,  we  have  not  stopped  at  number  999.  But  then  
comes   a  problem—are   we  spreading   ourselves  too  thin?  
The   temptation  Fromm  was  describing,  I  believe,  is  what  
we  saw  as  we  watched  our  participants   racing  from   one   
door  to  another.  
Running  from  door  to  door  is  a  strange  enough   human   
activity.  But  even  stranger  is  our  compulsion  to  chase  after  
doors  of little worth—opportunities  that  are nearly  dead,  or  
that  hold  little interest for us. My student  Dana, for instance, 
had  already  concluded that  one of her suitors  was most likely 
a  lost  cause.  Then  why  did  she  jeopardize  her  relationship  
with  the other  man  by continuing to nourish  the wilting rela­
tionship  with  the  less appealing  romantic  partner? Similarly, 
how  many  times  have  we  bought  something  on  sale  not  be­
cause  we  really  needed  it  but  because  by  the  end  of the  sale  
148 

keeping  doors   open   
all of those  items would  be gone, and  we could  never  have  it  
at that  price again? 
THE   OTHER   SIDE  of  this  tragedy  develops  when  we  fail  to  
realize  that  some  things  really  are  disappearing  doors,  and  
need  our  immediate  attention.  We  may  work  more  hours  at  
our jobs, for instance, without  realizing that the childhood of 
our  sons  and  daughters   is  slipping  away.  Sometimes  these  
doors  close too  slowly for  us to  see them  vanishing.  One of 
my  friends  told  me,  for  instance,  that  the  single  best  year  
of  his  marriage  was  when  he  was  living  in  New  York,  his  
wife  was  living in Boston, and  they  met  only  on  weekends.  
Before  they  had  this  arrangement—when   they  lived  to­
gether  in Boston—they would  spend  their weekends  catch­
ing  up  on  work  rather  than  enjoying  each  other.  But  once  
the  arrangement   changed,  and  they  knew  that  they   had   
only  the  weekends  together,  their  shared  time became lim­
ited  and  had   a  clear  end   (the  time  of  the  return  train).  
Since  it  was  clear  that  the  clock  was  ticking,  they   dedi­
cated  the  weekends  to  enjoying  each  other  rather  than  do­
ing their  work.  
I'm  not  advocating  giving  up  work  and  staying  home  for  
the  sake  of  spending  all  your  time  with  your  children,  or  
moving to a different  city just to improve your weekends  with  
your  spouse  (although  it  might  provide  some  benefits).  But  
wouldn't  it be nice to  have  a built-in  alarm,  to warn  us  when  
the doors  are closing on our  most important  options?  
So   WHAT   CAN  we  do?  In  our  experiments,  we  proved  that  
running  helter-skelter  to  keep  doors  from  closing  is  a  fool's  
149 

predictably  irrational  
game.  It  will  not  only  wear  out  our  emotions  but  also  wear  
out  our  wallets. What  we need  is to  consciously start  closing  
some of our  doors.  Small doors, of course, are  rather  easy to 
close. We can  easily strike names off our  holiday  card  lists or 
omit  the  tae  kwon  do  from  our  daughter's  string  of  activi­
ties. 
But  the  bigger  doors   (or  those  that   seem  bigger)  are  
harder  to  close.  Doors  that  just  might  lead  to  a new  career  
or  to  a  better  job  might  be  hard  to  close.  Doors  that  are  
tied  to  our  dreams  are  also  hard  to  close.  So  are  relation­
ships  with  certain  people—even  if  they  seem  to  be  going  
nowhere. 
We have an irrational  compulsion to keep doors  open.  It's  
just the way we're wired. But that  doesn't  mean  we  shouldn't  
try  to  close  them.  Think  about  a  fictional  episode:  Rhett  
Butler  leaving  Scarlett O'Hara  in  Gone    with   the  Wind,   in   
the  scene when  Scarlett clings to  him  and  begs him,  "Where  
shall  I go? What  shall  I do?" Rhett, after  enduring  too  much  
from  Scarlett, and  finally having  his  fill of it, says, "Frankly, 
my  dear,  I  don't  give  a  damn."  It's  not  by  chance  that  this  
line has  been  voted  the  most  memorable  in  cinematographic  
history. It's the  emphatic  closing of a door  that  gives it wide­
spread  appeal.  And  it  should  be  a  reminder  to  all of us  that  
we  have  doors—little  and   big  ones—which   we  ought   to   
shut. 
We need to drop out of committees that  are  a waste of our 
time  and   stop  sending  holiday  cards  to  people  who   have   
moved  on  to  other  lives  and  friends.  We  need  to  determine  
whether  we  really  have  time  to  watch  basketball  and  play  
both  golf  and  squash  and  keep  our  family  together;  perhaps  
we  should  put  some  of these  sports  behind  us.  We  ought  to  
shut  them  because  they  draw  energy  and  commitment  away  
150 

keeping  doors   open   
from  the  doors  that  should  be  left  open—and  because  they  
drive  us crazy. 
SUPPOSE   YOU'VE   CLOSED   SO many  of  your  doors  that  you  
have  just  two  left.  I  wish  I  could  say  that  your  choices  are  
easier  now,  but  often  they  are not.  In  fact,  choosing  between  
two  things that  are similarly attractive  is one of the  most  dif­
ficult  decisions  we  can  make.  This  is  a  situation  not  just of 
keeping  options  open  for too  long,  but  of being  indecisive to 
the point  of paying  for  our  indecision  in  the  end.  Let me  use  
the following story to  explain.  
A  hungry  donkey  approaches  a  barn  one  day  looking  for  
hay  and  discovers two  haystacks  of identical  size  at  the  two  
opposite  sides of the  barn.  The  donkey  stands  in  the  middle  
of  the  barn  between  the  two  haystacks, not  knowing  which  
to  select. Hours  go  by,  but  he  still  can't  make  up  his  mind.  
Unable to decide, the donkey  eventually  dies of  starvation/
1
'  
This  story  is hypothetical, of course,  and  casts  unfair  as­
persions  on  the  intelligence  of  donkeys.  A  better  example  
might  be  the  U.S. Congress.  Congress  frequently  gridlocks  
itself, not necessarily with  regard  to the big picture of particu­
lar legislation—the restoration of the nation's aging highways, 
immigration, improving federal protection of endangered  spe­
cies, etc.—but  with  regard  to  the  details.  Often,  to  a  reason­
able person,  the party  lines on  these  issues  are  the  equivalent  
of  the two  bales of hay. Despite this, or because of it, Congress 
is  frequently  left  stuck  in  the  middle.  Wouldn't  a  quick  deci­
sion have been better  for  everybody?  
* The French  logician  and philosopher Jean  Buridan's commentaries on  Aristotle's theory 
of  action were the impetus  of this  story, known  as "Buridan's ass." 
151 

predictably  irrational  
Here's  another  example.  One  of  my  friends  spent  three  
months  selecting  a  digital  camera  from  two  nearly  identical  
models. When  he finally made  his selection, I asked him  how  
many  photo  opportunities  had  he  missed,  how  much  of  his  
valuable  time  he  had  spent  making  the  selection,  and  how  
much  he would  have paid  to  have digital  pictures  of his  fam­
ily  and   friends  documenting  the  last  three  months.  More  
than the price of the camera, he said. Has  something like this 
ever happened  to  you?  
What  my friend  (and also the donkey and  Congress) failed 
to do when  focusing on the similarities and  minor  differences  
between  two  things  was  to  take  into  account  the     conse­
quences     of  not   deciding.    The donkey  failed to consider  starv­
ing, Congress failed to consider the  lives lost while it  debated  
highway  legislation, and  my  friend  failed  to  consider  all  the  
great pictures  he was missing, not to mention  the time he was 
spending  at  Best  Buy. More important,  they  all failed to  take  
into consideration the relatively minor  differences that  would  
have come with  either one of the decisions. 
My  friend   would   have  been  equally  happy  with   either   
camera;  the  donkey  could  have  eaten  either  bale of hay;  and  
the  members  of  Congress  could  have  gone  home  crowing  
over  their  accomplishments,  regardless  of  the  slight  differ­
ence  in  bills.  In  other  words,  they  all should  have  considered  
the decision an  easy one. They could have even  flipped  a coin 
(figuratively,  in  the  case of  the  donkey)  and  gotten  on  with  
their  lives. But  we  don't  act  that  way,  because  we  just  can't  
close those  doors.  
ALTHOUGH   CHOOSING   BETWEEN  two  very  similar  options  
should  be  simple,  in  fact  it  is  not.  I  fell  victim  to  this  very  
152 

keeping  doors   open   
same  problem   a  few  years  ago,  when   I  was   considering   
whether  to  stay  at MIT or  move to Stanford  (I chose MIT  in  
the  end). Confronted  with  these  two  options,  I spent  several  
weeks comparing the two  schools closely and  found  that  they  
were  about  the  same  in  their  overall  attractiveness  to  me. So 
what  did  I do? At this stage of my problem,  I decided  I needed 
some  more  information   and  research  on  the  ground.  So  I  
carefully  examined  both  schools. I met  people  at  each  place  
and  asked  them  how  they  liked  it.  I  checked  out  neighbor­
hoods  and possible schools for our kids. Sumi and  I  pondered  
how  the  two  options  would  fit  in  with  the  kind  of  life  we  
wanted  for ourselves. Before  long, I was getting  so engrossed 
in  this  decision  that  my  academic  research  and  productivity  
began  to  suffer.  Ironically, as  I searched  for  the  best place  to  
do  my work,  my research was  being neglected. 
Since you have probably  invested some money to  purchase  
my wisdom  in  this book  (not to  mention  time, and  the  other  
activities you have given  up  in the process),  I should  probably  
not  readily  admit  that  I wound  up  like the  donkey,  trying  to  
discriminate  between  two  very  similar  bales  of  hay.  But  I  
did. 
In  the  end,  and  with  all  my  foreknowledge  of  the  diffi­
culty  in  this  decision-making  process,  I  was  just  as  predict­
ably irrational  as everyone  else.  
153 



C HAPTE   R    9    
The  Effect  of Expectations 
Why  the  Mind   Gets  What  It    Expects    
S
uppose  you're  a fan  of the  Philadelphia  Eagles and  you're  
watching  a football  game  with  a  friend  who,  sadly,  grew  
up  in  New  York  City  and  is  a  rabid  fan  of the  Giants. You 
don't  really  understand   why  you  ever  became  friends,   but   
after  spending  a  semester  in  the  same  dorm  room  you  start  
liking him,  even though  you think  he's football-challenged. 
The  Eagles  have  possession  and  are  down  by  five  points  
with  no time-outs  left. It's the  fourth  quarter,  and  six seconds 
are left on the clock. The ball is on the  12-yard line. Four  wide  
receivers  line  up  for  the  final  play. The  quarterback  hikes  the  
ball  and  drops  back  in  the  pocket.  As the  receivers sprint  to­
ward  the  end  zone, the quarterback  throws  a high  pass  just  as  
the  time runs out.  An  Eagles wide  receiver near  the  corner of 
the end  zone dives for the ball and  makes  a spectacular catch. 
The  referee signals a touchdown  and  all the Eagles players 
run  onto  the  field  in  celebration. But  wait.  Did  the  receiver  
get both of his feet in? It looks close on the Jumbotron; so the 

predictably   irrational   
booth  calls down for a review. You turn to your friend:  "Look  
at  that!  What  a  great  catch! He  was  totally  in. Why  are  they  
even reviewing it?" Your friend  scowls. "That was completely 
out!  I can't  believe the  ref didn't  see it! You must  be crazy  to  
think  that  was  in!"  
What  just  happened?  Was your  friend  the  Giants  fan  just  
experiencing  wishful   thinking?  Was  he  deceiving  himself?  
Worse, was he lying? Or had  his loyalty to his team—and  his  
anticipation of its win—completely, truly, and  deeply  clouded  
his  judgment?  
I was thinking about that one evening, as I strolled  through  
Cambridge  and  over  to  MIT's  Walker  Memorial  Building.  
How  could  two  friends—two  honest  guys—see  one  soaring  
pass  in  two  different  ways?  In  fact,  how  could  any  two  par­
ties  look  at  precisely the  same  event  and  interpret  it  as  sup­
porting  their opposing points of view? How  could Democrats 
and  Republicans look at  a single schoolchild who  is unable  to  
read,  and  take  such  bitterly  different  positions  on  the  same  
issue? How  could  a couple embroiled  in  a  fight  see the causes 
of  their  argument  so  differently?  
A friend  of mine who  had  spent time in Belfast,  Ireland, as a 
foreign  correspondent,  once  described  a  meeting  he  had  ar­
ranged  with  members  of the IRA. During  the  interview,  news  
came  that  the  governor  of the Maze prison,  a  winding  row of 
cell  blocks  that  held  many  IRA  operatives,  had  been  assassi­
nated. The IRA members standing  around  my friend,  quite  un­
derstandably,  received the  news with  satisfaction—as  a victory 
for their cause. The British, of course, didn't see it in those terms 
at all. The headlines  in London  the next day  boiled with  anger  
and  calls  for  retribution.  In  fact,  the  British  saw  the  event  as  
proof  that  discussions  with  the  IRA would  lead  nowhere  and  
that the IRA should  be crushed.  I am an Israeli, and no  stranger  
156 

the  effect   of  expectations  
to  such  cycles  of  violence. Violence  is  not  rare.  It  happens  so  
frequently  that  we rarely stop to ask ourselves why. Why does it 
happen?  Is it  an  outcome of history, or  race, or  politics—or is 
there something fundamentally  irrational  in  us that  encourages  
conflict, that causes us to look at the same event and,  depending  
on our point of view, see it in totally different  terms ? 
Leonard  Lee  (a  professor  at  Columbia), Shane Frederick 
(a professor  at MIT),  and  I didn't  have  any  answers  to  these  
profound  questions.  But  in  a  search  for  the  root  of this  hu­
man  condition,  we decided to set up  a series of simple experi­
ments  to  explore how  previously  held  impressions  can  cloud  
our  point  of  view.  We  came  up  with  a  simple  test—one  in  
which  we  would  not  use  religion, politics, or  even  sports  as  
the indicator. We would  use glasses of beer. 
You  REACH  THE entrance to Walker by climbing a set of broad 
steps  between  towering  Greek columns. Once inside  (and  after  
turning right), you enter two rooms with carpeting that  predates  
the  advent  of electric light, furniture  to match,  and  a  smell  that  
has  the  unmistaken  promise  of alcohol, packs of peanuts,  and  
good company. Welcome to the Muddy  Charles—one of MIT's 
two  pubs,  and  the  location  for  a  set  of  studies  that  Leonard,  
Shane,  and  I  would  be  conducting  over  the  following  weeks.  
The purpose of our experiments would be to determine  whether  
people's expectations influence their views of subsequent events— 
more  specifically, whether  bar  patrons'  expectations  for  a  cer­
tain kind of beer would  shape their perception of its taste. 
Let  me  explain  this  further.  One  of the  beers  that  would  
be  served  to  the  patrons  of  the  Muddy   Charles  would  be  
Budweiser. The second would  be what  we fondly  called MIT 
Brew. What's MIT Brew? Basically  Budweiser, plus  a "secret 
157 

predictably   irrational   
ingredient"—two  drops  of balsamic vinegar  for  each  ounce  
of  beer.  (Some of  the MIT  students  objected  to  our  calling  
Budweiser  "beer,"  so  in  subsequent  studies,  we  used  Sam  
Adams—a  substance  more  readily  acknowledged  by  Bosto-
nians  as "beer.") 
At about  seven that  evening, Jeffrey,  a second-year PhD  stu­
dent  in  computer  science, was  lucky  enough  to  drop  by  the  
Muddy  Charles.  "Can  I  offer  you  two  small,  free  samples of 
beer?" asked Leonard, approaching  him. Without much hesita­
tion,  Jeffrey  agreed,  and  Leonard  led  him  over to  a  table  that  
held  two  pitchers  of  the  foamy  stuff,  one  labeled  A  and  the  
other B. Jeffrey  sampled  a mouthful  of one of them,  swishing it 
around  thoughtfully,  and  then  sampled  the  other.  "Which one 
would you like a large glass of?" asked Leonard. Jeffrey  thought  
it over. With  a  free  glass in the  offing,  he wanted  to  be sure  he  
would  be spending  his near future  with  the right  malty  friend.  
Jeffrey  chose  beer  B  as  the  clear  winner,  and  joined  his  
friends   (who  were  in  deep  conversation  over  the  cannon  
that  a group  of MIT students  had  recently "borrowed"  from  
the   Caltech  campus).  Unbeknownst   to  Jeffrey,   the   two   
beers he had  previewed  were Budweiser and  the MIT Brew— 
and  the  one he selected was the vinegar-laced MIT Brew. 
A  few  minutes  later, Mina,  a  visiting  student  from  Esto­
nia,  dropped  in.  "Like a  free  beer?" asked  Leonard.  Her  re­
ply  was  a  smile  and  a  nod  of  the  head.  This  time,  Leonard  
offered  more  information.  Beer  A, he explained,  was  a  stan­
dard  commercial  beer,  whereas  beer  B  had  been  doctored  
with  a  few  drops  of  balsamic  vinegar.  Mina  tasted  the  two  
beers.  After  finishing  the  samples  (and  wrinkling  her  nose  at  
the  vinegar-laced  brew  B) she  gave the  nod  to  beer A. Leon­
ard  poured   her  a  large  glass  of  the  commercial  brew  and  
Mina  happily  joined her  friends  at the  pub.  
158 

the  effect   of  expectations  
Mina  and  Jeffrey  were  only  two  of hundreds  of  students  
who  participated  in  this  experiment.  But  their  reaction  was  
typical:  without  foreknowledge  about  the  vinegar,  most  of  
them  chose the  vinegary MIT Brew.  But when  they  knew  in  
advance  that  the  MIT  Brew  had  been  laced  with  balsamic  
vinegar,  their  reaction  was  completely  different.  At  the  first  
taste  of the  adulterated  suds,  they  wrinkled  their  noses  and  
requested  the standard  beer instead. The moral, as you  might  
expect,  is  that  if  you  tell  people  up  front  that   something   
might  be distasteful,  the odds  are good  that  they  will end  up  
agreeing  with  you—not  because  their  experience  tells  them  
so but  because of their expectations. 
If,  at this point  in the book, you are considering the estab­
lishment of a new  brewing  company, especially one that  spe­
cializes in adding some balsamic vinegar to beer, consider the 
following  points:  (1) If people  read  the  label, or  knew  about  
the  ingredient,  they  would  most  likely  hate  your  beer.  (2)  
Balsamic  vinegar  is  actually  pretty  expensive—so  even  if  it  
makes  beer taste  better,  it  may  not  be worth  the  investment.  
Just  brew  a better  beer  instead.  
BEER  WAS  JUST  the  start  of our  experiments. The MBA stu­
dents  at MIT's  Sloan School also drink  a lot of coffee.  So one 
week, Elie Ofek  (a professor  at the Harvard  Business School), 
Marco  Bertini  (a professor  at  the  London  Business  School),  
and  I opened  an  impromptu  coffee  shop, at which  we  offered  
students   a  free  cup  of  coffee  if  they  would  answer  a  few  
questions about  our  brew. A line quickly formed.  We  handed  
our  participants  their  cups  of  coffee  and  then  pointed  them  
to  a  table  set  with  coffee  additives—milk,  cream,  half-and-
half,  white  sugar,  and  brown  sugar.  We  also  set  out  some  
159 

predictably   irrational   
unusual  condiments—cloves,  nutmeg,   orange  peel,  anise,  
sweet  paprika,  and  cardamom—for  our  coffee  drinkers  to  
add  to their  cups  as they  pleased.  
After  adding what  they wanted  (and none of our  odd  con­
diments  were  ever  used)  and  tasting  the  coffee,  the  partici­
pants   filled  out  a  survey  form.  They  indicated  how  much  
they  liked the  coffee,  whether  they would  like it served  in  the  
cafeteria  in  the  future,  and  the  maximum  price  they  would  
be willing to  pay  for this particular  brew.  
We  kept  handing  out  coffee  for  the  next  few  days,  but  
from  time  to  time  we  changed  the  containers  in  which  the  
odd  condiments  were  displayed.  Sometimes we  placed  them  
in  beautiful   glass-and-metal   containers,  set  on   a   brushed   
metal  tray  with  small  silver spoons  and  nicely printed  labels.  
At  other  times  we  placed  the  same  odd  condiments  in  white  
Styrofoam  cups. The labels were handwritten  in  a red  felt-tip  
pen.  We  went  further  and  not  only  cut  the  Styrofoam  cups  
shorter,  but  gave them  jagged, hand-cut  edges.  
What  were the results? No, the fancy containers didn't  per­
suade  any of the  coffee  drinkers  to  add  the  odd  condiments  (I  
guess  we  won't  be  seeing  sweet  paprika   in  coffee   anytime   
soon).  But the  interesting  thing  was that  when  the  odd  condi­
ments were offered  in the fancy containers, the  coffee  drinkers  
were much more likely to tell us that  they liked the coffee  a lot, 
that  they  would  be  willing  to  pay  well  for  it,  and  that  they  
would  recommend that  we should  start  serving this new  blend  
in  the  cafeteria. When  the  coffee  ambience looked upscale,  in  
other  words,  the  coffee  tasted  upscale as well. 
WHEN  WE  BELIEVE  beforehand  that  something  will be good, 
therefore,  it  generally  will  be  good—and  when  we  think  it  
160 

the  effect   of   expectations   
will  be  bad,  it  will  bad.  But how  deep  are  these  influences?  
Do  they  just  change  our  beliefs,  or  do  they  also  change  the  
physiology of the experience itself? In other words, can  previ­
ous  knowledge  actually  modify  the  neural  activity  underly­
ing the taste itself, so that  when  we expect something to  taste  
good  (or bad), it will actually taste that  way?  
To  test  this  possibility, Leonard,  Shane,  and  I  conducted  
the  beer experiments  again, but  with  an  important  twist. We 
had  already  tested  our  MIT  Brew  in  two  ways—by  telling  
our  participants  about  the  presence  of  vinegar  in  the  beer  
before   they tasted  the brew, and  by not  telling them  anything  
at  all about  it. But suppose  we initially didn't  tell them  about  
the  vinegar,  then  had  them  taste  the  beer,  then  revealed  the  
presence  of  the  vinegar,  and  then  asked  for  their  reactions.  
Would  the  placement  of  the  knowledge—coming  just  after  
the  experience—evoke  a  different  response  from  what   we   
received  when  the  participants  got  the  knowledge  before  the  
experience? 
For  a moment,  let's switch  from  beer to  another  example.  
Suppose  you  heard  that  a  particular  sports  car  was  fantasti­
cally exciting to drive, took one for  a test drive, and  then  gave  
your  impressions  of the  car. Would  your  impressions  be  dif­
ferent  from  those of people  who  didn't know  anything  about  
the sports car, took the test drive, then  heard  the car was  hot,  
and  then  wrote  down  their impressions? In other words,  does  
it  matter  if knowledge  comes before  or  after  the experience? 
And  if  so,  which  type  of  input  is  more   important—knowl­
edge  before  the  experience, or  an  input  of information  after  
an  experience has taken place? 
The  significance  of  this  question   is  that  if  knowledge  
merely  informs  us of a state of affairs,  then  it shouldn't  mat­
ter  whether  our  participants  received the  information  before  
161 

predictably  irrational  
or  after  tasting  the  beer:  in  other  words,  if we  told  them  up  
front  that  there  was  vinegar  in  the  beer,  this  should   affect   
their  review of the  beer. And  if we told  them  afterward,  that  
should  similarly  affect  their  review.  After  all, they  both  got  
the same bad news about  the vinegar-laced beer. This is what 
we should  expect if knowledge  merely  informs    us.    
On  the  other  hand,  if  telling  our  participants  about  the  
vinegar  at  the  outset  actually  reshapes  their  sensory  percep­
tions to align with  this knowledge, then  the participants  who  
know  about  the vinegar  up  front  should  have  a markedly  dif­
ferent  opinion  of the  beer from  those who  swigged  a glass of 
it,  and  then  were  told. Think of it this  way. If knowledge ac­
tually modifies the taste, then the participants  who  consumed  
the  beer  before  they  got  the  news  about  the  vinegar,  tasted  
the  beer  in  the  same  way  as  those  in  the  "blind"  condition  
(who  knew  nothing  about  the  vinegar). They  learned  about  
the  vinegar  only  after  their  taste  was  established,  at  which  
point,  if expectations change  our  experience, it  was  too  late  
for  the knowledge  to  affect  the  sensory perceptions. 
So,  did  the  students  who  were told  about  the vinegar  after  
tasting  the  beer  like  it  as  little  as  the  students  who  learned  
about  the  vinegar  before  tasting  the  beer? Or  did  they  like it 
as much  as the students  who  never learned about  the vinegar? 
What  do  you  think?  
As  it  turned  out,  the  students  who  found  out  about  the  
vinegar  after  drinking  the  beer  liked  the  beer  much  better  
than  those who  were told  about  the vinegar  up  front.  In  fact,  
those  who  were  told  afterward  about  the  vinegar  liked  the  
beer  just  as  much  as those  who  weren't  aware  that  there  was  
any  vinegar  in the  beer at all. 
What  does  this  suggest? Let  me  give you  another  exam­
ple.  Suppose  Aunt  Darcy  is  having  a  garage  sale, trying  to  
162 

the  effect   of  expectations  
get  rid  of  many  things  she  collected during  her  long  life.  A  
car  pulls  up,  some  people  get  out,  and  before  long  they  are  
gathered  around  one of the oil paintings  propped  up  against  
the  wall.  Yes, you  agree  with  them,  it  does  look  like  a  fine  
example  of  early  American  primitivism.  But  do  you  tell  
them  that  Aunt  Darcy  copied  it  from  a  photograph   just  a  
few  years earlier? 
My  inclination,  since  I  am   an  honest,  upright   person,   
would  be to  tell them.  But should  you  tell them  before  or  af­
ter  they  finish  admiring  the  painting?  According to  our  beer  
studies,  you  and  Aunt  Darcy would  be better  off keeping  the  
information  under wraps  until  after the examination. I'm  not  
saying that  this  would  entice the  visitors to  pay  thousands  of  
dollars  for  the  painting  (even though  our  beer  drinkers  pre­
ferred  our  vinegar-laced  beer  as  much  when  they  were  told  
after  drinking  it  as  when  they  were  not  told  at  all), but  it  
might  get you  a higher price for Aunt  Darcy's  work.  
By  the  way,  we  also  tried  a  more  extreme  version  of  this  
experiment. We told  one of two  groups  in  advance  about  the  
vinegar  (the  "before"  condition)  and  told  the  second  group  
about  the  vinegar  after  they  had  finished  the  sampling  (the  
"after"  condition).  Once  the  tasting  was  done,  rather   than   
offer  them  a large glass of their  choice,  we instead  gave  them  
a  large  cup  of  unadulterated   beer,  some  vinegar,  a  dropper,  
and  the recipe for the MIT Brew  (two drops of balsamic vin­
egar  per  ounce  of  beer).  We  wanted  to  see  if people  would  
freely  add  balsamic  vinegar  to  their  beer;  if  so,  how  much  
they  would  use;  and  how  these  outcomes  would  depend  on  
whether  the participants  tasted the beer before or after  know­
ing about  the  vinegar.  
What  happened?  Telling the  participants  about  the  vine­
gar  after  rather  than  before  they  tasted  the  beer doubled  the  
163 

predictably   irrational   
number  of participants  who  decided  to  add  vinegar  to  their  
beer.  For  the  participants  in  the  "after"  condition,  the  beer  
with  vinegar  didn't  taste  too  bad  the  first  time  around  (they  
apparently  reasoned),  and  so  they  didn't  mind  giving  it  an-
other  try.*  
As  YOU   SEE,  expectations  can  influence  nearly  every  aspect  
of  our  life.  Imagine  that  you  need  to  hire  a  caterer  for  your  
daughter's  wedding.  Josephine's  Catering  boasts  about   its   
"delicious   Asian-style   ginger   chicken"   and   its    "flavorful    
Greek  salad  with  kalamata  olives  and  feta  cheese."  Another  
caterer,   Culinary   Sensations,  offers   a   "succulent   organic   
breast  of  chicken  roasted  to  perfection  and  drizzled  with  a  
merlot  demi-glace,  resting  in  a  bed  of  herbed  Israeli  cous-
cous"  and  a  "mélange  of the  freshest  roma  cherry  tomatoes  
and  crisp  field  greens, paired  with  a warm  circle of chèvre  in  
a  fruity  raspberry  vinagrette."  
Although  there  is no  way  to know  whether  Culinary  Sen-
sations'  food  is  any  better  than  Josephine's, the  sheer  depth  
of  the  description  may  lead  us  to  expect  greater  things  from  
the  simple  tomato  and  goat  cheese  salad.  This,  accordingly,  
increases the  chance that  we  (and  our  guests, if we  give  them  
the  description  of the  dish)  will rave  over  it.  
This  principle,  so  useful  to  caterers,  is  available to  every-
one. We can  add  small  things  that  sound  exotic  and  fashion-
able to  our  cooking  (chipotle-mango  sauces seem  all the  rage  
right  now,  or  try  buffalo  instead  of beef).  These  ingredients  
might  not  make  the  dish  any  better  in  a  blind  taste  test;  but  
*We  were  also  hoping  to  measure the amount of vinegar students  added  to  the  beer.  But  
everyone  who  added  vinegar added  the exact  amount  specified  in  the  recipe.  
164 

the  effect   of  expectations  
by  changing  our  expectations, they  can  effectively  influence  
the taste when  we have this  pre-knowledge.  
These  techniques  are  especially  useful  when  you  are  in­
viting people  for  dinner—or  persuading  children  to  try  new  
dishes. By the  same token,  it might  help the taste of the  meal  
if  you  omit  the  fact that  a certain  cake is made  from  a com­
mercial  mix  or  that  you  used  generic  rather  than   brand-
name  orange  juice in  a  cocktail, or,  especially for  children,  
that  Jell-O  comes from  cow  hooves.  I am  not  endorsing  the  
morality  of  such  actions, just  pointing  to  the  expected  out­
comes. 
Finally,  don't  underestimate   the  power  of  presentation.  
There's  a reason  that  learning  to present  food  artfully  on  the  
plate  is  as  important  in  culinary  school  as  learning  to  grill  
and  fry. Even when  you buy take-out,  try removing the Styro­
foam  packaging  and  placing  the  food  on  some  nice  dishes  
and  garnishing  it  (especially if you  have  company); this  can  
make  all the  difference.  
One  more  piece of advice: If you  want  to  enhance  the ex­
perience of your  guests, invest  in  a nice set of wineglasses. 
Moreover,  if  you're  really  serious  about  your  wine,  you  
may want  to go all out  and  purchase  the  glasses that  are  spe­
cific  to burgundies,  chardonnays,  champagne, etc. Each  type  
of  glass  is supposed  to provide  the  appropriate  environment,  
which  should  bring  out  the  best  in  these  wines  (even  though  
controlled  studies  find  that  the  shape  of the  glass  makes  no  
difference  at  all  in  an  objective blind  taste  test,  that  doesn't  
stop  people  from  perceiving  a  significant  difference   when   
they  are handed  the  "correct glass").  Moreover, if you  forget  
that  the  shape  of the  glass really has  no  effect  on  the  taste of 
the  wine,  you  yourself  may  be  able  to  better  enjoy  the  wine  
you consume  in the  appropriately  shaped  fancy glasses. 
165 

predictably   irrational   
Expectations, of course, are not  limited to food. When  you  
invite people  to  a  movie, you  can  increase their  enjoyment  by  
mentioning  that  it  got  great  reviews. This  is also essential  for  
building  the  reputation  of  a  brand  or  product.  That's  what  
marketing   is   all   about—providing    information   that   will   
heighten  someone's  anticipated  and  real  pleasure.  But  do  ex­
pectations created  by marketing  really change our  enjoyment?  
I'm  sure  you  remember  the  famous  "Pepsi Challenge"  ads  
on  television  (or  at  least  you  may  have  heard  of them). The 
ads  consisted of people  chosen  at  random,  tasting  Coke  and  
Pepsi  and  remarking  about  which  they  liked  better.  These  
ads,  created  by Pepsi, announced  that  people  preferred  Pepsi  
to Coke. At the  same time, the  ads  for  Coke proclaimed  that  
people preferred  Coke to Pepsi. How  could that  be? Were the 
two  companies  fudging  their statistics? 
The  answer  is  in  the  different  ways  the  two  companies  
evaluated  their  products.  Coke's market  research  was  said  to  
be based on consumers' preferences when  they could see what 
they  were  drinking,   including  the  famous   red   trademark.   
While  Pepsi  ran  its  challenge  using  blind  tasting  and  stan­
dard  plastic  cups  marked  M  and  Q.  Could  it  be  that  Pepsi  
tasted  better  in  a  blind  taste  test  but  that  Coke tasted  better  
in  a non-blind  (sighted) test? 
To better understand  the puzzle of Coke versus Pepsi, a ter­
rific  group  of neuroscientists—Sam McClure, Jian  Li, Damon 
Tomlin, Kim Cypert, Latané Montague, and Read Montague— 
conducted  their  own  blind  and  non-blind  taste  test  of  Coke  
and  Pepsi.  The  modern  twist  on  this  test  was  supplied  by  a  
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)  machine. With 
this machine, the researchers could monitor  the  activity of the 
participants'  brains while they consumed  the  drinks.  
Tasting  drinks  while  one  is  in  an  fMRI  is not  simple,  by  
166 

the  effect   of  expectations  
the  way, because a person  whose brain  is being scanned  must  
lie perfectly still. To overcome this problem, Sam and  his  col­
leagues put  a long plastic tube  into the mouth  of each partici­
pant,  and   from   a  distance  injected  the  appropriate   drink   
(Pepsi  or  Coke)  through  the  tube  into  their  mouths.  As  the  
participants  received  a  drink,  they  were  also  presented  with  
visual  information  indicating  either  that  Coke  was  coming,  
that  Pepsi was  coming, or  that  an  unknown  drink  was  com­
ing. This way the  researchers could  observe the  brain  activa­
tion of the participants  while they consumed  Coke and  Pepsi,  
both  when  they  knew  which  beverage  they  were   drinking   
and  when  they  did  not.  
What  were  the  results?  In  line  with  the  Coke  and  Pepsi  
"challenges,"  it  turned  out  that  the  brain  activation  of  the  
participants  was different  depending  on whether  the name of 
the drink  was revealed or not. This is what  happened:  When­
ever  a person  received a squirt  of Coke or Pepsi, the center of 
the   brain   associated   with   strong   feelings   of   emotional   
connection—called    the    ventromedial    prefrontal    cortex,    
VMPFC—was  stimulated.  But  when  the  participants  knew  
they were going to get a squirt of Coke, something  additional  
happened.  This time, the  frontal  area  of the  brain—the  dor­
solateral  aspect of the prefrontal  cortex, DLPFC,  an  area  in­
volved in higher human  brain functions like working memory, 
associations,  and  higher-order   cognitions  and   ideas—was   
also  activated.  It  happened   with  Pepsi—but  even  more  so  
with   Coke   (and,  naturally,  the   response   was   stronger   in   
people who  had  a stronger  preference  for  Coke).  
The  reaction of the  brain  to  the  basic hedonic  value of  the  
drinks  (essentially sugar)  turned  out  to  be similar  for  the  two  
drinks. But the advantage of Coke over Pepsi was due to Cokes's 
brand—which   activated  the  higher-order  brain  mechanisms.  
167 

predictably   irrational   
These  associations, then,  and  not  the  chemical  properties  of  
the drink,  gave Coke an  advantage  in the  marketplace.  
It  is  also  interesting  to  consider  the  ways  in  which  the  
frontal  part  of the  brain  is connected  to  the  pleasure  center.  
There  is a dopamine  link by which the  front  part of the  brain  
projects  and  activates  the  pleasure  centers. This  is  probably  
why  Coke  was  liked  more  when  the  brand  was  known—the  
associations  were  more  powerful,  allowing  the  part  of  the  
brain  that  represents  these associations to enhance activity in 
the  brain's  pleasure  center. This  should  be good  news  to  any  
ad  agency,  of  course,  because  it  means  that  the  bright  red  
can, swirling script, and  the myriad  messages that  have come 
down to consumers  over the years  (such as "Things go better 
with  .  . .") are  as  much  responsible  for  our  love of  Coke  as  
the  brown  bubbly  stuff  itself.  
EXPECTATIONS   ALSO   SHAPE  stereotypes.  A  stereotype,  after  
all,  is  a  way  of categorizing information,  in  the  hope  of  pre­
dicting  experiences. The  brain  cannot  start  from  scratch  at  
every  new  situation.  It must  build  on  what  it has  seen  before.  
For  that  reason,  stereotypes  are  not  intrinsically  malevolent.  
They  provide  shortcuts  in  our  never-ending  attempt  to  make  
sense  of complicated  surroundings.  This  is  why  we  have  the  
expectation that  an  elderly person  will need  help using  a com­
puter  or  that  a  student  at  Harvard  will  be  intelligent.*  But  
because  a  stereotype  provides  us  with  spécifie  expectations  
about  members  of  a  group,  it  can  also  unfavorably  influence  
both  our  perceptions  and  our  behavior.  
"There  is  a nice  T-shirt on  sale  at the MIT  bookstore that  reads "Harvard:  Because not 
everyone can get  into MIT." 
168 

the  effect   of  expectations  
Research  on  stereotypes  shows  not  only that  we react  dif­
ferently  when  we  have  a  stereotype  of  a  certain  group  of  
people, but  also that  stereotyped  people  themselves react  dif­
ferently  when  they  are aware  of the label that  they  are  forced  
to  wear  (in  psychological parlance,  they  are  "primed"  with  
this  label).  One  stereotype  of Asian-Americans, for  instance,  
is that  they  are  especially gifted  in  mathematics  and  science.  
A  common  stereotype  of  females  is  that  they  are  weak  in  
mathematics. This means that Asian-American women  could  
be influenced  by both  notions.  
In  fact,  they  are.  In  a  remarkable  experiment,  Margaret  
Shin,   Todd   Pittinsky,   and   Nalini   Ambady   asked   Asian-
American  women  to  take  an  objective  math  exam.  But  first  
they  divided  the  women  into  two  groups.  The  women  in  one  
group  were  asked  questions  related  to  their  gender.  For  ex­
ample,  they  were  asked  about  their  opinions  and  preferences  
regarding  coed  dorms,  thereby  priming  their  thoughts   for   
gender-related  issues. The  women  in  the  second  group  were  
asked questions related to their race. These questions  referred  
to the languages they knew, the languages they spoke at home, 
and  their  family's  history  in  the  United  States,  thereby  prim­
ing the women's  thoughts  for race-related issues. 
The  performance  of  the  two  groups  differed   in  a  way  
that  matched  the  stereotypes  of  both  women   and   Asian-
Americans.  Those  who  had  been  reminded  that  they  were  
women  performed  worse than those who  had  been  reminded  
that they were Asian-American. These results  show that  even  
our  own  behavior  can  be  influenced  by  our  stereotypes,  and  
that activation of stereotypes can depend on our  current  state  
of  mind  and  how  we view ourselves  at the  moment.  
Perhaps even more astoundingly,  stereotypes can also  affect  
the  behavior of people who  are not  even part of a  stereotyped  
169 

predictably   irrational   
group.  In  one  notable  study,  John  Bargh,  Mark  Chen,  and  
Lara Burrows had  participants  complete a scrambled-sentence 
task,  rearranging  the  order  of  words  to  form  sentences  (we  
discussed this type of task  in Chapter  4).  For some of the  par­
ticipants,  the  task  was  based  on  words  such  as      aggressive,      
rude,   annoying,    and  intrude.    For  others,  the  task  was  based  
on  words  such  as  honor,     considerate,       polite,    and     sensitive.     
The  goal  of  these  two  lists  was  to  prime  the  participants  to  
think  about  politeness  or  rudeness  as  a  result  of  constructing  
sentences  from  these  words  (this  is  a  very  common  technique  
in social psychology, and  it works  amazingly  well).  
After  the  participants  completed  the  scrambled-sentence  
task,  they  went  to  another  laboratory  to  participate  in  what  
was purportedly  a second task. When  they arrived  at the  sec­
ond  laboratory,  they  found  the  experimenter  apparently  in  
the  midst  of trying  to  explain  the  task  to  an  uncomprehend­
ing  participant  who  was  just  not  getting  it  (this  supposed  
participant  was  in  fact  not  a  real participant  but  a  confeder­
ate working  for the experimenter). How  long do  you think  it  
took  the  real  participants  to  interrupt  the  conversation  and  
ask what  they  should  do next? 
The  amount  of waiting  depended  on  what  type  of  words  
had  been involved in the scrambled-sentence task. Those who 
had  worked  with  the  set of polite  words  patiently  waited  for  
about  9.3  minutes   before  they  interrupted,   whereas  those  
who  had  worked  with  the  set  of  rude  words  waited  only  
about  5.5 minutes  before  interrupting.  
A second experiment tested the same general idea  by  prim­
ing  the  concept  of  the  elderly,  using  words  such  as      Florida,      
bingo,   and  ancient.    After  the  participants  in  this  experiment  
completed  the  scrambled-sentence  task,  they  left  the  room,  
thinking  that  they  had  finished  the  experiment—but  in  fact  
170 

the  effect   of  expectations  
the  crux  of  the  study  was  just  beginning.  What  truly  inter­
ested  the  researchers  was  how  long  it would  take  the  partici­
pants  to walk down the hallway  as they  left  the building.  Sure  
enough,  the  participants  in  the  experimental  group  were  af­
fected  by the "elderly" words: their walking speed was consid­
erably  slower than  that  of a control  group  who  had  not  been  
primed.  And  remember,  the  primed  participants   were  not  
themselves  elderly  people  being  reminded  of  their  frailty—  
they were undergraduate students  at NYU. 
ALL    THESE    EXPERIMENTS   teach   us  that   expectations  are  
more than  the mere anticipation of a boost from  a fizzy Coke. 
Expectations  enable  us  to  make  sense of  a  conversation  in  a  
noisy  room,  despite  the  loss  of  a  word  here  and  there,  and  
likewise, to  be able to read  text  messages on  our  cell  phones,  
despite  the  fact  that  some  of  the  words  are  scrambled.  And  
although  expectations can make  us look foolish from  time  to  
time, they  are  also very powerful  and  useful.  
So  what  about  our  football  fans  and  the   game-winning   
pass?  Although  both  friends  were  watching  the  same  game,  
they  were  doing  so  through   markedly  different  lenses.  One  
saw  the  pass  as  in  bounds.  The other  saw  it  as out.  In  sports,  
such  arguments  are  not  particularly  damaging—in  fact,  they  
can  be  fun.  The  problem  is that  these  same  biased  processes  
can  influence  how  we  experience other  aspects of our  world.  
These biased processes are in fact  a major  source of escalation 
in almost every conflict, whether Israeli-Palestinian, American-
Iraqi, Serbian-Croatian, or  Indian-Pakistani.  
In  all  these  conflicts,  individuals   from   both  sides  can  
read  similar  history  books  and  even  have  the  same  facts  
taught  to  them,  yet  it  is  very  unusual  to  find   individuals   
171 

predictably   irrational   
who  would  agree  about  who  started  the  conflict,  who  is  to  
blame,  who  should  make  the  next  concession, etc.  In  such  
matters, our  investment  in our  beliefs is much  stronger  than  
any  affiliation  to  sport  teams,  and  so  we  hold  on  to  these  
beliefs  tenaciously. Thus  the  likelihood of agreement  about  
"the  facts"  becomes smaller  and  smaller  as personal  invest­
ment  in  the  problem  grows.  This  is  clearly  disturbing.  We  
like to think  that  sitting  at the  same table together  will  help  
us  hammer  out  our  differences  and  that  concessions  will  
soon  follow.  But  history  has  shown  us  that  this  is  an   un­
likely  outcome;  and  now  we know  the  reason  for  this  cata­
strophic  failure.  
But  there's  reason  for  hope.  In  our  experiments,  tasting  
beer  without  knowing  about  the  vinegar,  or  learning  about  
the  vinegar  after  the  beer was  tasted,  allowed  the  true  flavor  
to come out.  The  same  approach  should  be used  to  settle  ar­
guments:  The  perspective  of  each  side  is  presented   without   
the  affiliation—the  facts  are  revealed,  but  not  which  party  
took  which  actions.  This  type  of  "blind"  condition  might  
help  us better  recognize the  truth.  
When  stripping  away  our  preconceptions  and  our  previ­
ous  knowledge  is  not  possible,  perhaps  we  can  at  least  ac­
knowledge  that  we  are  all biased. If we acknowledge that  we  
are trapped  within  our  perspective, which partially  blinds  us  
to  the  truth,  we  may  be  able to  accept the  idea  that  conflicts  
generally  require  a  neutral  third  party—who   has  not  been  
tainted  with  our  expectations—to  set  down  the  rules  and  
regulations. Of course, accepting the word  of a third  party  is  
not  easy  and  not  always  possible;  but  when  it  is possible,  it  
can  yield  substantial  benefits. And  for  that  reason  alone,  we  
must  continue  to  try.  
172 

C HAPTE  RIO  
The  Power of Price 
Why  a  50-Cent    Aspirin   Can  Do  What  
a  Penny   Aspirin    Can't    
I
f  you were living in  1950 and  had  chest pain,  your cardiolo­
gist  might  well have  suggested  a procedure  for  angina pec­
toris called internal mammary artery ligation. In this operation, 
the patient  is anesthetized, the chest is opened  at the  sternum,  
and the internal mammary  artery  is tied off. Voilà! Pressure to 
the pericardiophrenic arteries is raised, blood flow to the myo­
cardium  is improved, and  everyone goes home  happy.
7   
This  was  an  apparently  successful  operation,  and  it  had  
been  a popular  one for the  previous 20 years. But one  day  in  
1955,  a cardiologist in  Seattle, Leonard Cobb, and  a few  col­
leagues  became  suspicious. Was  it  really  an  effective proce­
dure?  Did  it  really  work?  Cobb  decided  to  try  to  prove  the  
efficacy  of the  procedure  in  a  very  bold  way:  he  would  per­
form  the  operation  on  half  his  patients,  and  fake  the  proce­
dure  on  the  other  half.  Then  he  would  see which  group  felt  
better,  and  whose  health  actually improved.  In  other  words,  
after  25  years  of  filleting  patients  like  fish,  heart  surgeons  

predictably   irrational   
would  finally  get  a  scientifically controlled  surgical  trial  to  
see how  effective the procedure  really was. 
To carry out this test, Dr. Cobb performed  the  traditional  
procedure  on  some of the  patients,  and  placebo  surgery  on  
the  others.  The  real  surgery  meant  opening  the  patient  up  
and  tying  up  the  internal  mammary  artery.  In  the  placebo  
procedure,  the  surgeon  merely  cut  into  the  patient's  flesh  
with   a  scalpel,  leaving  two   incisions.  Nothing   else  was  
done. 
The  results were startling. Both  the patients who  did  have  
their  mammary  arteries constricted and  those who  didn't re­
ported  immediate relief from their chest pain. In both  groups,  
the  relief  lasted  about  three  months—and  then  complaints  
about  chest  pain  returned.  Meanwhile, electrocardiograms 
showed  no  difference  between  those who  had  undergone  the  
real  operation  and  those  who  got  the  placebo  operation.  In  
other  words,  the  traditional  procedure  seemed  to  provide  
some  short-term  relief—but  so  did  the  placebo.  In  the  end,  
neither procedure  provided  significant long-term relief. 
More  recently  a  different  medical procedure  was  submit­
ted  to  a  similar  test,  with  surprisingly  similar  results.  As  
early  as  1993, J. B. Moseley, an  orthopedic  surgeon,  had  in­
creasing  doubts  about  the  use  of arthroscopic  surgery  for  a  
particular  arthritic  affliction of the  knee. Did  the  procedure  
really work? Recruiting 180 patients with  osteoarthritis  from  
the  veterans'  hospital  in  Houston,  Texas,  Dr.  Moseley  and  
his colleagues divided  them  into three  groups.  
One  group  got  the  standard  treatment:  anesthetic,  three  
incisions,  scopes  inserted,  cartilage  removed,  correction of 
soft-tissue  problems,  and  10 liters of saline  washed  through  
the  knee. The  second  group  got  anesthesia,  three incisions, 
scopes  inserted,  and  10 liters of saline, but  no  cartilage  was  
174 

the  power  of   price   
175 
removed. The third  group—the  placebo group—looked  from  
the  outside  like  the  other  two  treatments  (anesthesia,  inci­
sions, etc.); and  the procedure  took the same amount  of time; 
but  no  instruments   were  inserted  into  the  knee.  In  other  
words, this was simulated  surgery.
8   
For  two  years  following  the  surgeries,  all  three   groups   
(which  consisted  of volunteers,  as  in  any  other  placebo ex­
periment)  were  tested  for  a  lessening of their  pain,  and  for  
the  amount  of time  it  took  them  to  walk  and  climb  stairs.  
How  did  they  do? The groups  that  had  the  full  surgery  and  
the arthroscopic lavage were delighted,  and  said they  would  
recommend  the  surgery  to  their  families  and  friends.  But  
strangely—and  here was the bombshell—the placebo  group  
also  got  relief  from  pain  and  improvements  in  walking—to  
the  same extent,  in  fact,  as those  who  had  the  actual  opera­
tions. Reacting to this startling conclusion, Dr. Nelda  Wray,  
one  of  the  authors  of  the  Moseley  study,  noted,  "The  fact  
that  the  effectiveness  of  arthroscopic  lavage  and   debride­
ment  in patients  with  osteoarthritis of the knee  is no  greater  
than  that  of placebo surgery  makes  us question  whether  the  
$1 billion  spent  on  these  procedures  might  be  put  to  better  
use." 
If  you  assume that  a firestorm  must  have followed this  re­
port,  you're right. When the study  appeared  on July  11,  2002,  
as  the  lead  article in  the  New   England     Journal     of      Medicine,      
some doctors  screamed  foul  and  questioned  the  method  and  
results of the  study.  In response, Dr. Moseley argued  that  his  
study  had  been  carefully  designed  and  carried  out.  "Sur­
geons  . .  . who  routinely  perform  arthroscopy  are  undoubt­
edly embarrassed  at the prospect that  the placebo effect—not 
surgical  skill—is  responsible  for  patient  improvement   after   
the  surgeries  they  perform.  As  you  might  imagine,  these  

predictably   irrational   
surgeons  are  going  to  great  lengths  to  try  to  discredit  our  
study." 
Regardless  of  the  extent  to  which  you  believe the  results  
of  this  study,  it  is  clear  that  we  should  be  more  suspicious  
about  arthroscopic surgery  for  this particular  condition,  and  
at  the  same  time  increase  the  burden  of  proof  for  medical  
procedures  in  general.  
IN  THE  PREVIOUS  chapter  we  saw  that  expectations  change  
the  way  we  perceive  and  appreciate  experiences. Exploring 
the  placebo  effect  in  this  chapter,  we'll  see not  only  that  be­
liefs  and  expectations  affect  how  we  perceive  and  interpret  
sights,  tastes,  and  other  sensory  phenomena,  but  also  that  
our  expectations can  affect  us  by altering  our  subjective  and  
even objective experiences—sometimes profoundly  so.  
Most  important,  I  want  to  probe  an  aspect  of  placebos  
that  is not  yet  fully  understood.  It  is the  role that  price   plays   
in  this  phenomenon.  Does  a  pricey  medicine  make  us  feel  
better than  a cheap medicine? Can  it actually make  us   physi­
ologically     better  than  a  cheaper  brand?  What  about  expen­
sive  procedures,   and   new-generation   apparatuses,   such  as  
digital  pacemakers  and  high-tech  stents? Does their  price in­
fluence  their  efficacy?  And  if so, does  this  mean  that  the  bill  
for  health  care  in  America  will  continue  to  soar?  Well,  let's  
start  at the  beginning.  
PLACEBO      COMES   FROM  the  Latin  for  "I  shall  please."  The  
term  was  used  in  the  fourteenth   century  to  refer  to  sham  
mourners  who  were hired  to wail and  sob for the deceased  at  
176 

the  power  of   price   
funerals.  By 1785 it  appeared  in  the  New   Medical        Diction­
ary,  attached  to marginal  practices of medicine. 
One  of the  earliest  recorded  examples of the  placebo  ef­
fect  in  medical literature  dates  from  1794.  An  Italian  physi­
cian  named  Gerbi  made  an  odd  discovery: when  he  rubbed  
the secretions of a certain  type of worm  on  an  aching  tooth,  
the  pain  went  away  for  a year.  Gerbi  went  on  to  treat  hun­
dreds of patients  with  the  worm  secretions, keeping  meticu­
lous  records  of  their  reactions.  Of  his  patients,  68  percent  
reported   that  their  pain,  too,  went   away  for  a  year.  We  
don't  know  the  full  story of Gerbi  and  his worm  secretions,  
but  we have  a pretty  good  idea that  the  secretions really  had  
nothing  to  do  with  curing  toothaches.  The  point   is  that  
Gerbi  believed  they  helped—and   so  did  a  majority  of  his  
patients. 
Of  course, Gerbi's worm  secretion wasn't the only placebo 
in the market.  Before  recent times, almost  all medicines  were  
placebos.  Eye of  the  toad,  wing  of the  bat,  dried  fox  lungs,  
mercury,  mineral  water,  cocaine,  an  electric  current:  these  
were  all  touted  as  suitable  cures  for  various  ailments.  When  
Lincoln  lay  dying  across the  street  from  Ford's  Theater,  it  is  
said that  his physician  applied  a bit of "mummy  paint"  to  the  
wounds.  Egyptian  mummy,  ground   to  a  powder,   was  be­
lieved  to  be  a  remedy  for  epilepsy,  abscesses,  rashes,  frac­
tures,  paralysis, migraine, ulcers, and  many  other  things.  As  
late  as  1908, "genuine  Egyptian  mummy"  could  be  ordered  
through  the E. Merck catalog—and  it's probably  still  in  use  
somewhere  today.
9   
Mummy  powder  wasn't  the  most  macabre  of medicines, 
though.   One   seventeenth-century   recipe  for   a   "cure  all"  
medication  advised:  "Take the  fresh  corpse  of  a  red-haired,  
177 

predictably   irrational   
uninjured,  unblemished  man, 24 years old and killed no  more  
than  one  day  before, preferably  by hanging,  breaking  on  the  
wheel  or  impaling.  .  .  . Leave it one  day  and  one  night  in  the  
light  of the  sun  and  the  moon,  then  cut  into  shreds  or  rough  
strips. Sprinkle on  a little powder  of myrrh  and  aloes, to  pre­
vent  it from  being too  bitter."  
We  may  think  we're  different  now.  But  we're  not.  Place­
bos still work  their magic on  us. For years, surgeons  cut  rem­
nants   of  scar   tissue   out   of  the   abdomen,   for   instance,   
imagining  that  this  procedure  addressed  chronic  abdominal  
pain—until   researchers  faked  the  procedure   in  controlled  
studies  and  patients  reported  equal  relief.
10
  Encainide,  fle-
cainide,   and   mexiletine  were   widely   prescribed   off-label   
drugs for irregular  heartbeat—and  were later found  to cause 
cardiac arrest.
11
  When  researchers tested  the  effect  of the six 
leading  antidepressants,  they  noted  that  75 percent  of the  ef­
fect  was  duplicated  in placebo controls.
12
 The  same was  true  
of  brain  surgery  for  Parkinson's  disease.
13
  When  physicians  
drilled  holes  in  the  skulls  of  several  patients  without   per­
forming  the  full  procedure,  to  test  its  efficacy,  the  patients  
who  received  the  sham  surgery  had  the  same  outcome  as  
those  who  received the  full  procedure.  And  of course the  list  
goes on  and  on.  
One  could  defend   these  modern   procedures   and  com­
pounds  by noting  that  they  were  developed  with  the  best  in­
tentions. This is true. But so were the applications of Egyptian 
mummy, to  a great extent. And sometimes, the mummy  pow­
der  worked  just  as  well  as  (or  at  least  no  worse  than)  what­
ever else was  used.  
The truth  is that  placebos run  on the power of suggestion. 
They  are  effective  because  people  believe  in  them.  You  see  
your  doctor  and  you  feel  better.  You pop  a  pill  and  you  feel  
178 

the  power  of   price   
better. And  if your  doctor  is a highly  acclaimed specialist, or 
your prescription  is for  a new wonder  drug of some kind,  you  
feel  even better. But how  does  suggestion  influence  us?  
IN   GENERAL,  TWO  mechanisms  shape  the  expectations  that  
make  placebos work.  One  is belief—our  confidence  or  faith  
in  the  drug,  the  procedure,  or  the  caregiver. Sometimes just 
the  fact  that  a  doctor  or  nurse  is paying  attention  to  us  and  
reassuring  us  not  only  makes  us  feel  better  but  also  triggers  
our  internal  healing  processes.  Even  a  doctor's   enthusiasm   
for  a  particular  treatment  or  procedure  may  predispose   us   
toward  a positive outcome. 
The  second  mechanism  is  conditioning.  Like  Pavlov's  fa­
mous  dogs  (that  learned  to  salivate  at  the  ring  of  a  bell),  the  
body  builds  up  expectancy after  repeated  experiences and  re­
leases various  chemicals to prepare  us for the  future.  Suppose  
you've ordered  pizza  night  after  night. When the  deliveryman  
presses  the  doorbell,  your  digestive  juices  start  flowing  even  
before you can smell the pie. Or suppose that you are  snuggled  
up  on  the  couch  with  your  loved  one.  As  you're  sitting  there  
staring  into  a  crackling  fire,  the  prospect  of  sex  releases  en­
dorphins,  preparing  you  for  what  is to  come next,  and  send­
ing your  sense of well-being into the  stratosphere.  
In  the  case  of  pain,  expectation  can  unleash   hormones   
and  neurotransmitters,  such  as endorphins  and  opiates,  that  
not  only  block  agony  but  produce  exuberant  highs  (endor­
phins  trigger the same receptors  as morphine). I vividly recall 
lying  in  the  burn  ward  in  terrible pain.  As  soon  as  I saw  the  
nurse  approaching,  with  a needle almost dripping with  pain­
killer,  what   relief!  My  brain  began  secreting   pain-dulling   
opioids, even before the needle broke  my  skin.  
179 

predictably   irrational   
Thus  familiarity  may  or  may  not  breed  contempt,  but  it  
definitely  breeds  expectations. Branding, packaging,  and  the  
reassurance  of  the  caregiver  can  make  us  feel  better.  But  
what  about  price? Can  the  price of a drug also affect  our  re­
sponse to it? 
ON   THE  BASIS  of  price  alone,  it  is  easy  to  imagine  that  a  
$4,000  couch  will  be  more  comfortable  than  a  $400  couch;  
that  a pair  of designer  jeans will be better  stitched  and  more  
comfortable  than  a  pair  from  Wal-Mart;  that  a  high-grade  
electric sander  will work  better than  a low-grade  sander;  and  
that  the  roast  duck  at  the  Imperial  Dynasty  (for  $19.95)  is  
substantially  better  than  the  roast  duck  at  Wong's  Noodle  
Shop  (for $10.95).  But can  such  implied  difference  in  quality  
influence  the  actual  experience, and  can  such  influence  also  
apply  to  objective experiences such  as our  reactions to  phar­
maceuticals? 
For  instance,  would  a  cheaper  painkiller  be  less effective 
than   a  more  expensive  one?  Would  your  winter  cold  feel  
worse  if you  took  a  discount  cold  medicine than  if you  took  
an  expensive one? Would  your  asthma  respond  less well to  a  
generic drug than  to the latest brand-name  on the market? In 
other  words,  are  drugs  like  Chinese  food,  sofas,  blue jeans, 
and  tools? Can  we assume that  high price means higher  qual­
ity,  and  do  our  expectations translate  into  the  objective  effi­
cacy of the  product?  
This  is  a particularly  important  question.  The  fact  is  that  
you  can  get  away  with  cheaper  Chinese food  and  less expen­
sive jeans. With  some  self-control, we  can  usually  steer  our­
selves  away  from  the  most  expensive  brands.  But  will  you  
really look for bargains when  it comes to your health?  Putting  
180 

the  power  of   price   
the common  cold aside for the moment,  are many  of us  going  
to pinch pennies  when  our  lives are at risk? No—we  want  the  
best, for ourselves, our  children,  and  our  loved ones. 
If  we want  the  best  for  ourselves, does  an  expensive drug 
make  us  feel  better  than  a  cheaper  drug?  Does  cost  really  
make  a difference  in  how  we  feel?  In  a  series of experiments 
a  few  years  ago, that's  what  Rebecca  Waber  (a graduate  stu­
dent  at MIT),  Baba  Shiv  (a professor  at  Stanford), Ziv  Car-
mon,  and  I decided  to  find  out.  
IMAGINE  THAT  YOU'RE  taking  part  in  an  experiment  to  test  
the  efficacy  of  a  new  painkiller  called  Veladone-Rx. (The 
actual  experiment  involved  about  100 adult  Bostonians, but 
for  now, we'll let you take their place.) 
You  arrive  at  the MIT  Media  Lab  in  the  morning.  Taya  
Leary,  a  young  woman  wearing  a  crisp  business  suit  (this  is  
in  stark  contrast  to  the  usual  attire  of  the  students  and  fac­
ulty  at MIT),  greets you warmly, with  a hint  of a Russian ac­
cent.  A  photo  ID  identifies  Taya  as  a  representative  of Vel 
Pharmaceuticals.  She invites you  to  spend  a  moment  reading  
a  brochure  about  Veladone-Rx. Glancing  around,  you  note  
that  the room looks like a medical office:  stale copies of   Time   
and  Newsweek     are scattered around;  brochures for Veladone-
Rx  are  spread  out  on  the  table; and  nearby  is  a  cup  of pens, 
with  the drug's handsome  logo. "Veladone is an  exciting new 
medication  in  the  opioid  family," you  read.  "Clinical  studies  
show  that  over  92 percent  of patients  receiving Veladone  in  
double-blind  controlled  studies  reported  significant  pain  re­
lief  within  only  10 minutes,  and  that  pain  relief  lasted  up  to  
eight  hours."  And  how  much  does  it  cost? According to  the  
brochure, $2.50  for  a single dose. 
181 

predictably  irrational  
Once  you  finish  reading  the  brochure,  Taya  calls  in Re­
becca  Waber  and   leaves  the  room.  Rebecca,  wearing   the   
white  coat  of  a  lab  technician,  with  a  stethoscope  hanging  
from  her neck, asks you  a set of questions  about  your  medical  
condition  and  your  family's  medical  history.  She  listens  to  
your   heart   and   measures   your   blood  pressure.   Then   she   
hooks  you  up  to  a  complicated-looking  machine.  The  elec­
trodes  running from  the  machine,  greased  with  a  green  elec­
trode  gel,  encircle  your  wrists.  This  is  an  electrical  shock  
generator,  she  explains,  and  it  is  how  we  will  test  your  per­
ception  and  tolerance of  pain.  
With  her  hand  on  the  switch,  Rebecca  sends  a  series of 
electrical  shocks  through  the  wires  and  into  the  electrodes.  
The  initial  shocks  are  merely  annoying.  Then  they  become  
painful,  more  painful,  and  finally  so  painful  that  your  eyes  
fly open  and  your  heart  begins to race. She records your  reac­
tions. Now  she starts  delivering  a new  set of electrical shocks. 
This  time  she administers  a  set of charges  that  fluctuate  ran­
domly  in  intensity:  some  are  very  painful  and  some  merely  
irritating.  Following each one, you  are  asked  to record,  using  
the  computer  in  front  of  you,  the  amount  of  pain  you  felt.  
You  use  the  mouse  to  click  on  a  line  that  ranges  from   "no   
pain  at  all"  to  "the  worst  pain  imaginable"  (this  is  called  a  
"visual  pain  analog").  
When  this part  of the  torture  ends,  you  look  up.  Rebecca  
is  standing  before  you  with  a  Veladone  capsule  in  one  hand  
and  a  cup  of water  in  the  other.  "It  will  take  about  15  min­
utes  for  the  drug to  reach  its maximal  effect,"  she  says. You 
gulp  it  down,  and  then  move  to  a  chair  in  the  corner,  where  
you  look  at  the  old  copies  of  Time   and  Newsweek      until  the  
pill takes  effect.  
Fifteen   minutes   later  Rebecca,  smearing  the  electrodes  
182 

the  power  of   price   
with  the  same  green  electrode  gel,  cheerfully  asks,  "Ready  
for  the next step?" You say nervously,  "As ready  as I can be." 
You're  hooked  up  to  the  machine  again,  and  the  shocks be­
gin. As before, you record the  intensity of the pain  after  each  
shock.  But  this  time  it's  different.  It  must  be  the  Veladone-
Rx!  The  pain  doesn't  feel  nearly  as  bad.  You  leave  with  a  
pretty  high  opinion of Veladone. In fact,  you hope  to  see it in 
the neighborhood  drugstore  before  long.  
Indeed,  that's  what  most  of  our  participants  found.  Al­
most  all  of  them  reported  less  pain  when  they  experienced  
the  electrical shocks  under  the  influence  of  Veladone. Very 
interesting—considering  that  Veladone was  just  a  capsule of 
vitamin  C.  
FROM  THIS  EXPERIMENT,  we saw that  our  capsule did  have  a  
placebo  effect.  But  suppose  we  priced  the  Veladone  differ­
ently.   Suppose   we   discounted   the   price  of   a   capsule  of  
Veladone-Rx  from  $2.50  to just  10 cents. Would  our  partici­
pants  react  differently?  
In  our  next  test,  we changed  the  brochure,  scratching  out  
the  original  price  ($2.50  per  pill)  and  inserting  a  new  dis­
count  price  of  10  cents.  Did  this  change  our   participants'   
reaction? Indeed. At $2.50  almost  all our participants  experi­
enced pain  relief from the pill. But when the price was dropped 
to  10 cents, only half  of them  did.  
Moreover, it turns out that  this relationship  between  price  
and  placebo effect  was  not  the  same for  all participants,  and  
the  effect  was  particularly  pronounced  for  people  who  had  
more experience with  recent pain.  In other  words,  for  people  
who  had  experienced more pain,  and  thus depended  more  on  
pain   medications,  the  relationship  was  more   pronounced:   
183 

predictably   irrational   
they  got  even  less  benefit  when  the  price  was  discounted.  
When  it  comes  to  medicines, then,  we  learned  that  you  get  
what  you  pay  for. Price can change the experience. 
INCIDENTALLY,  WE GOT corroborating results in another  test,  
a  study  we  conducted  one  miserably  cold  winter  at  the  Uni­
versity of Iowa.  In  this  case we  asked  a  group  of students  to  
keep  track  of whether  they  used  full-price  or  discount  medi­
cines  for  their  seasonal colds, and  if so, how  well those  rem­
edies worked.  At the end of the semester,  13 participants  said  
they'd  paid   list  price  and   16  had   bought   discount   drugs.   
Which  group  felt  better? I think  you can guess by now: the 13 
who  paid  the  list  price  reported  significantly  better  medical  
outcomes  than  the  16 who  bought  the  medication  at  a  dis­
count.  And  so,  in  over-the-counter  cold  medication,  what  
you  pay  is often  what  you  get.  
FROM   OUR   EXPERIMENTS   with  our  "pharmaceuticals"  we  
saw  how  prices  drive  the  placebo  effect.  But do  prices  affect  
everyday  consumer  products  as  well? We  found  the  perfect  
subject  in SoBe Adrenaline Rush, a beverage that  promises  to  
"elevate your  game"  and  impart  "superior  functionality."  
In  our  first  experiment,  we  stationed  ourselves  at  the  en­
trance of the  university's  gym,  offering  SoBe. The  first  group  
of  students  paid  the  regular  price  for  the  drink.  A  second  
group  also  purchased  the  drink,  but  for  them  the  price  was  
marked  down  to  about  one-third  of the  regular  price.  After  
the  students  exercised, we asked them  if they  felt  more or less 
fatigued  relative  to  how  they  normally  felt  after  their  usual  
184 

the   power  of   price   
workouts.  Both  groups  of students  who  drank  the SoBe  indi­
cated that  they were somewhat  less fatigued  than  usual.  That  
seemed plausible, especially considering the hefty  shot of caf­
feine  in each bottle of SoBe. 
But  it was  the  effect  of the price, not  the  effect  of the  caf­
feine,  that  we  were  after.  Would  higher-priced  SoBe  reduce  
fatigue  better than  the  discounted  SoBe? As you can  imagine  
from  the experiment with  Veladone, it did. The students  who  
drank  the  higher-priced  beverage  reported  less  fatigue  than  
those who  had  the discounted  drink.  
These  results  were interesting,  but  they  were based  on  the  
participants'  impressions of their  own  state—their  subjective  
reports.  How  could  we  test  SoBe  more  directly  and   objec­
tively? We found  a  way:  SoBe  claims  to  provide  "energy  for  
your  mind."  So we decided  to test that  claim by using  a series 
of  anagrams.  
It  would  work  like this.  Half  of the  students  would  buy  
their  SoBe  at  full  price, and  the  other  half  would  buy  it  at  a  
discount.  (We actually charged  their  student  accounts, so in 
fact  their  parents  were  the  ones  paying  for  it.)  After  con­
suming  the  drinks,  the  students  would  be  asked  to  watch  a  
movie for  10 minutes  (to allow the  effects  of the  beverage  to  
sink  in,  we explained). Then  we  would  give each of them  a  
15-word  puzzle,  with  30  minutes  to  solve  as  many  of  the  
problems  as  they  could.  (For example,  when  given  the  set  
TUPPIL,  participants  had  to  rearrange  it  to  PULPIT—or  
they  would   have  to  rearrange   FRIVEY,  RANCOR,   and   
SVALIE  to  get ...  ).  
We  had  already  established  a  baseline,  having  given  the  
word-puzzle  test  to  a  group  of  students  who  had  not  drunk  
SoBe.  This  group  got  on  average  nine  of the  15 items  right.  
185 

predictably   irrational   
What  happened  when  we  gave  the  puzzles  to  the  students  
who  drank  SoBe? The students  who  had  bought  it at the  full  
price also got on  average about  nine answers  right—this  was  
no different  from  the outcome for those who had  no drink  at  
all. But more interesting were the answers from the discounted 
SoBe  group:  they  averaged 6.5 questions right. What can  we  
gather  from  this?  Price  does  make  a  difference,  and  in  this  
case  the  difference  was  a  gap  of about  28 percent  in  perfor­
mance on  the word  puzzles.  
So  SoBe  didn't  make  anyone  smarter.  Does  this  mean  
that  the  product  itself  is  a  dud  (at  least  in  terms  of solving 
word  puzzles) ? To answer this question, we devised  another  
test. The following message was printed  on  the  cover of the 
quiz booklet: "Drinks  such  as SoBe  have been shown  to  im­
prove mental functioning,"  we noted, "resulting in improved 
performance   on  tasks  such  as  solving  puzzles."  We  also  
added  some  fictional information,  stating  that  SoBe's  Web  
site referred  to more than  50 scientific  studies  supporting  its  
claims. 
What  happened? The group  that  had  the full-price  drinks  
still  performed   better  than  those  that  had  the  discounted  
drinks.  But  the  message  on  the  quiz  booklet  also  exerted  
some  influence.  Both  the  discount  group  and  the  full-price  
group,  having  absorbed  the  information  and  having  been  
primed  to  expect  success,  did  better  than  the  groups  whose  
quiz  cover didn't  have  the  message. And  this  time  the  SoBe  
did  make people  smarter.  When  we  hyped  the  drink  by  stat­
ing  that  50  scientific  studies  found  SoBe  to  improve  mental  
functioning,  those  who  got  the  drink  at  the  discount  price  
improved  their  score  (in  answering  additional  questions)  by  
0.6,  but  those  who  got  both  the  hype  and  the  full  price  im­
proved  by 3.3 additional  questions. In other  words,  the  mes-
186 

the  power  of   price   
sage  on  the  bottle  (and  the  quiz  cover)  as  well  as  the  price  
was  arguably  more powerful  than  the  beverage inside. 
ARE  WE  DOOMED,  then,  to  get  lower  benefits  every  time  we  
get  a discount? If we  rely on  our  irrational  instincts, we will. 
If  we  see a discounted  item, we will instinctively assume  that  
its  quality  is less than  that  of  a  full-price  item—and  then  in  
fact  we  will  make  it  so. What's  the  remedy?  If we  stop  and  
rationally  consider  the  product  versus  the  price,  will  we  be  
able to break  free of the unconscious urge to discount  quality  
along with  price?  
We  tried  this  in  a  series  of experiments,  and  found   that   
consumers who  stop to reflect about the relationship  between  
price and quality are far less likely to assume that  a discounted 
drink  is less effective  (and,  consequently, they  don't  perform  
as  poorly  on  word  puzzles  as  they  would  if they  did  assume  
it). These results not only suggest  a way to overcome the rela­
tionship  between  price  and  the  placebo  effect  but  also  sug­
gest  that  the  effect  of  discounts  is  largely  an  unconscious  
reaction to  lower prices. 
So   WE'VE   SEEN  how  pricing  drives  the  efficacy  of placebo, 
painkillers, and  energy drinks.  But here's another  thought. If 
placebos  can  make  us  feel  better,  should  we  simply  sit  back  
and  enjoy  them?  Or  are  placebos  patently  bad—shams  that  
should  be discarded,  whether  they  make  us  feel  good  or  not?  
Before  you  answer  this  question,  let  me  raise  the  ante.  Sup­
pose  you  found  a  placebo  substance  or  a  placebo  procedure  
that  not  only  made  you  feel  better  but  actually  made  you  
physically  better.  Would  you  still  use  it? What  if you  were  a  
187 

predictably   irrational   
physician?  Would  you  prescribe  medications  that  were  only  
placebos? Let me  tell you  a story  that  helps explain  what  I'm  
suggesting. 
In  AD 800, Pope Leo III crowned  Charlemagne  emperor  
of   the  Romans,  thus  establishing   a  direct   link   between   
church  and  state. From  then  on  the  Holy  Roman  emperors,  
followed  by the kings of Europe, were imbued  with  the glow 
of  divinity.  Out  of  this  came  what  was  called  the  "royal  
touch"—the   practice  of  healing  people.  Throughout   the   
Middle  Ages,  as  one  historian  after  another  chronicled,  the  
great  kings  would  regularly  pass  through  the  crowds,  dis­
pensing  the  royal touch.  Charles II of England  (1630-1685),  
for  instance, was  said  to  have  touched  some  100,000  people  
during  his  reign;  and  the  records  even  include  the  names of 
several  American  colonists, who  returned  to  the  Old  World  
from  the  New  World  just  to  cross paths  with  King  Charles  
and  be  healed.  
Did  the  royal  touch  really  work? If no  one  had  ever  got­
ten  better  after  receiving the  royal touch, the practice  would  
obviously  have  withered  away.  But throughout  history,  the  
royal  touch  was  said  to  have  cured  thousands  of  people.  
Scrofula,  a  disfiguring  and  socially  isolating  disease  often  
mistaken  for  leprosy,  was  believed  to  be  dispelled  by  the  
royal touch.  Shakespeare wrote  in  Macbeth:     "Strangely vis­
ited people, All sworn and ulcerous, pitiful  to the eye  .  .  .  Put  
on  with  holy  prayers  and  'tis  spoken,  the  healing  benedic­
tion."  The  royal  touch  continued  until  the  1820s,  by  which  
time monarchs were no longer considered  heaven-sent—and  
(we  might  imagine)  "new, improved!"  advances  in  Egyptian  
mummy  ointments  made  the  royal touch obsolete. 
When  people  think   about   a  placebo  such  as  the  royal  
touch,  they  usually  dismiss  it  as "just psychology." But, there 
188 

the  power  of   price   
is nothing  "just" about  the power  of a placebo, and  in  reality  
it  represents  the  amazing  way  our  mind  controls  our  body.  
How  the  mind  achieves  these  amazing  outcomes  is  not  al­
ways  very  clear.* Some  of  the  effect,  to  be  sure,  has  to  do  
with  reducing  the  level of  stress,  changing  hormonal  secre­
tions, changing the immune  system, etc. The more we under­
stand   the  connection  between   brain   and   body,  the   more   
things  that  once  seemed  clear-cut  become  ambiguous.  No­
where  is this  as apparent  as with  the placebo. 
In  reality,  physicians  provide  placebos  all  the  time.  For  
instance,  a  study  done  in  2003  found  that  more  than  one-
third  of  patients  who  received  antibiotics  for  a  sore  throat  
were later found  to have viral infections, for which  an  antibi­
otic does  absolutely no  good  (and possibly contributes  to  the  
rising   number   of  drug-resistant   bacterial   infections   that   
threaten  us all
14
).  But do  you think  doctors will stop  handing  
us  antibiotics  when  we  have  viral  colds? Even  when  doctors  
know  that  a  cold  is  viral  rather  than  bacterial  (and  many  
colds  are  viral),  they  still  know  very  well  that  the  patient  
wants  some  sort  of  relief;  most  commonly,  the  patient  ex­
pects to walk  out  with  a prescription.  Is it right  for the  physi­
cian to  fill  this psychic need? 
The  fact  that  physicians  give  placebos  all  the  time  does  
not  mean  that  they  want  to  do  this,  and  I  suspect  that  the  
practice   tends   to   make   them   somewhat   uncomfortable.   
They've been trained  to  see themselves as men  and  women of 
science, people  who  must  look to the  highest  technologies of 
modern  medicine  for  answers.  They  want  to  think  of  them­
selves  as  real  healers,  not  practitioners  of voodoo.  So  it  can  
*We  do  understand quite  precisely how  a placebo works  in  the domain  of pain,  and  this  
is why  we  selected  the painkiller  as our object of  investigation.  But other  placebo  effects  
are  not  as well  understood.  
189 

predictably   irrational   
be extremely difficult  for  them  to  admit,  even to  themselves,  
that  their job may  include promoting  health  through  the  pla­
cebo  effect.  Now  suppose  that  a doctor  does  allow,  however  
grudgingly,  that  a treatment  he knows  to  be  a placebo  helps  
some  patients.  Should  he  enthusiastically  prescribe  it?  After  
all, the physician's enthusiasm  for  a treatment  can play  a real 
role in  its  efficacy.  
Here's another  question  about  our national commitment  to  
health  care. America already  spends  more of its GDP per  per­
son on health  care than  any other Western nation. How  do  we  
deal with the fact that  expensive medicine (the 50-cent aspirin) 
may make people  feel better than  cheaper medicine  (the penny 
aspirin).  Do  we  indulge  people's  irrationality,  thereby  raising  
the  costs  of  health  care? Or  do  we  insist  that  people  get  the  
cheapest  generic drugs  (and  medical procedures)  on  the  mar­
ket,  regardless  of the  increased  efficacy  of the  more  expensive  
drugs ? How  do  we structure  the cost and  co-payment of treat­
ments  to  get  the  most  out  of  medications,  and  how  can  we  
provide  discounted  drugs to needy populations  without  giving  
them  treatments  that  are  less effective?  These are  central  and  
complex  issues  for  structuring  our  health  care  system.  I  don't  
have the answers to these questions, but they are important  for  
all of us to  understand.  
Placebos pose  dilemmas  for  marketers, too. Their  profes­
sion  requires  them  to  create perceived  value. Hyping  a  prod­
uct beyond  what  can  be objectively proved  is—depending  on  
the  degree  of  hype—stretching  the  truth  or  outright  lying.  
But  we've  seen that  the perception  of value,  in medicine,  soft  
drinks,  drugstore  cosmetics, or  cars, can  become real  value.  
If  people  actually  get more  satisfaction  out  of a product  that  
has  been  hyped,  has  the  marketer  done  anything  worse  than  
sell the  sizzle along with  the steak? As we start thinking  more  
190 

the  power  of   price   
about  placebos and  the  blurry  boundary  between  beliefs  and  
reality, these questions  become more  difficult  to  answer.  
As  A  SCIENTIST  I value experiments  that  test  our  beliefs  and  
the  efficacy  of  different  treatments.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  
also  clear to  me  that  experiments,  particularly  those  involv­
ing  medical  placebos,  raise  many  important   ethical  ques­
tions.  Indeed,  the  experiment  involving  mammary  ligation  
that  I  mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  raised  an  
ethical  issue:  there  was  an  outcry  against  performing   sham   
operations  on  patients.  
The  idea  of  sacrificing  the  well-being  and  perhaps  even  
the  life of some individuals  in order to learn whether  a partic­
ular  procedure  should  be used  on  other  people  at  some  point  
in the  future  is indeed  difficult  to  swallow. Visualizing a  per­
son  getting  a placebo treatment  for  cancer, for  example, just 
so that  years  later  other  people  will perhaps  get  better  treat­
ment  seems a strange  and  difficult  trade-off to  make.  
At  the  same time, the  trade-offs  we make  by  not  carrying  
out  enough  placebo experiments  are also hard  to accept. And 
as  we  have  seen, they  can  result  in  hundreds  or  thousands  of  
people undergoing  useless (but risky) operations. In the United 
States  very  few  surgical  procedures  are  tested  scientifically.  
For  that  reason,  we  don't  really  know  whether  many  opera­
tions really offer  a cure, or whether,  like many  of their  prede­
cessors,  they  are  effective  merely  because  of  their  placebo  
effect.  Thus,  we  may  find  ourselves  frequently  submitting  to  
procedures   and   operations  that  if  more  carefully   studied,   
would  be put  aside. Let me share  with  you  my own  story of a 
procedure  that,  in  my  case,  was  highly  touted,  but  in  reality  
was nothing  more than  a long, painful  experience.  
191 

predictably   irrational   
I had  been in the hospital for two  long months  when  my oc­
cupational  therapist  came  to  me  with  exciting  news.  There  
was  a  technological  garment  for  people  like  me  called  the  
Jobst  suit.  It  was  skinlike, and  it  would  add  pressure  to  what  
little skin I had  left, so that  my skin would  heal better. She told 
me that  it was  made  at one factory  in America, and  one in Ire­
land,  from  where  I  would  get  such  a  suit,  tailored  exactly to 
my  size.  She told  me  I  would  need  to  wear  trousers,  a  shirt,  
gloves,  and  a mask  on  my  face.  Since  the  suit  fit  exactly, they 
would  press  against  my  skin  all the  time,  and  when  I  moved,  
the Jobst suit would  slightly massage my skin, causing the  red­
ness and  the hypergrowth  of the scars to decrease. 
How  excited  I was!  Shula, the  physiotherapist,  would  tell  
me  about  how  wonderful  the Jobst  was.  She told  me  that  it  
was made  in different  colors, and  immediately I imagined  my­
self  covered from  head  to  toe  in  a tight  blue skin, like Spider-
Man; but  Shula cautioned  me that  the colors were only  brown  
for  white  people  and  black for  black people.  She told  me  that  
people used to call the police when  a person  wearing the Jobst 
mask  went  into  a  bank,  because  they  thought  it  was  a  bank  
robber. Now  when  you get the mask from  the factory, there  is  
a  sign you  have to put  on your  chest, explaining the  situation.  
Rather  than  deterring  me, this new  information  made  the  
suit  seem even better. It made  me smile. I thought  it would  be  
nice  to  walk  in  the  streets  and  actually  be  invisible. No  one  
would  be able to  see any part of me except my mouth  and  my  
eyes. And  no  one would  be able to  see my scars. 
As  I  imagined  this  silky  cover,  I  felt  I  could  endure  any  
pain  until  my Jobst suit  arrived.  Weeks went  by. And  then  it  
did  arrive.  Shula came to  help  me put  it on  for  the  first  time.  
We  started  with  the  trousers:  She opened  them,  in  all  their  
brownish  glory, and  started  to put  them  on  my legs. The  feel-
192 

the  power  of   price   
ing  wasn't  silky  like  something  that  would  gently  massage  
my scars. The material felt more like canvas that  would tear my 
scars.  I was  still  by  no  means  disillusioned.  I wanted  to  feel  
how  it would  be to  be immersed  completely in the  suit.  
After  a  few  minutes  it became apparent  that  I had  gained  
some  weight  since  the  time  when  the  measurements   were   
taken  (they  used  to  feed  me 7,000  calories and  30 eggs  a  day  
to  help  my  body  heal).  The  Jobst  suit  didn't  fit  very  well.  
Still, I had waited  a long time for it. Finally, with some stretch­
ing  and  a lot of patience  on  everyone's part,  I was  eventually  
completely  dressed.  The  shirt  with  the  long  sleeves put  great  
pressure  on  my chest, shoulders, and  arms. The mask  pressed  
hard  all  the  time.  The  long  trousers  began  at  my  toes  and  
went  all  the  way  up  to  my  belly button.  And  there  were  the  
gloves. The only visible parts  of me were the  ends of my toes, 
my  eyes,  my  ears,  and  my  mouth.  Everything  else  was  cov­
ered  by the  brown  Jobst.  
The  pressure  seemed  to  become  stronger  every  minute.  
The  heat  inside  was  intense. My  scars had  a poor  blood  sup­
ply, and  the  heat  made  the  blood rush to them,  making  them  
red  and  much  more itchy. Even the  sign warning  people that  I  
was not  a bank  robber was  a failure. The sign was in English, 
not  Hebrew,  and  so  was  quite  worthless.  My  lovely  dream  
had  failed me. I struggled  out of the  suit. New  measurements  
were  taken  and  sent  to  Ireland  so  that  I  could  get  a  better-
fitting  Jobst.  
The  next  suit  provided  a  more  comfortable  fit,  but  other­
wise it was not much  better. I suffered  with  this treatment  for  
months—itching,  aching,  struggling  to  wear  it,  and  tearing  
my delicate new  skin  while trying  to put  it on  (and  when  this  
new  thin  skin tears,  it takes  a long while to  heal).  At the  end  
I  learned  that  this  suit  had  no  real  benefits,  at  least  not  for  
193 

predictably   irrational   
me.  The  areas  of  my  body  that  were  better  covered  looked  
and  felt  no different  from  the  areas that  were not  as well cov­
ered,  and  the  suffering  that  went  along  with  the  suit  turned  
out  to be all that  it provided  me.  
You  see, while  it  would  be  morally  questionable  to  make  
patients  in  the  burn  department  take  part  in  an  experiment  
that  was  designed  to  test  the  efficacy  of such  suits  (using  dif­
ferent  types  of  fabrics,  different  pressure  levels,  etc.),  and  
even more difficult  to ask someone to participate  in a placebo 
experiment,  it  is also morally  difficult  to  inflict  painful  treat­
ments  on  many  patients  and  for  many  years, without  having  
a  really good  reason  to do  so.  
If  this  type  of  synthetic  suit  had  been  tested  relative  to  
other  methods,  and  relative to  a placebo  suit,  that  approach  
might  have  eliminated  part  of my  daily  misery. It  might  also  
have   stimulated   research   on   new   approaches—ones   that   
would  actually work. My wasted  suffering,  and  the  suffering  
of  other  patients  like  me,  is  the  real  cost  of  not  doing  such  
experiments. 
Should  we  always  test  every procedure  and  carry  out  pla­
cebo  experiments? The  moral  dilemmas  involved  in  medical  
and  placebo  experiments  are  real.  The  potential  benefits of 
such  experiments  should  be weighed  against  their  costs,  and  
as  a consequence we cannot,  and  should  not,  always  do  pla­
cebo  tests. But  my  feeling  is that  we  are  not  doing  nearly  as  
many  of them  as we  should.  
194 

CHAPTER     It     
The  Context of Our 
Character,  Part  I  
Why   We Are  Dishonest,   and   What   
We  Can  Do  about  It  
I
n 2004,  the  total  cost of all  robberies  in  the  United  States  
was  $525  million,  and  the  average  loss  from  a  single  rob­
bery  was  about  $1,300.
15
  These  amounts  are  not  very  high,  
when  we consider how  much  police, judicial, and  corrections  
muscle  is put  into  the  capture  and  confinement  of  robbers—  
let  alone  the  amount  of  newspaper   and  television  coverage  
these  kinds  of  crimes  elicit.  I'm  not  suggesting  that  we  go  
easy on career criminals, of course. They are thieves, and  we  
must  protect  ourselves  from  their  acts.  
But  consider  this:  every  year,  employees'  theft  and   fraud   
at  the  workplace  are  estimated  at  about  $600  billion.  That  
figure  is dramatically  higher than the combined  financial  cost  
of  robbery,  burglary,  larceny-theft,  and  automobile  theft  (to­
taling  about  $16 billion  in 2004);  it  is much  more  than  what  
all  the  career  criminals  in  the  United  States  could  steal  in  

predictably  irrational  
their  lifetimes; and  it's also almost  twice the  market  capital­
ization of General Electric. But there's much more. Each year, 
according  to  reports  by  the  insurance  industry,   individuals   
add  a  bogus  $24  billion  to  their  claims  of  property  losses.  
The  1RS, meanwhile,  estimates  a  loss  of  $350  billion  per  
year,  representing  the  gap  between  what  the  feds  think  peo­
ple  should  pay  in  taxes  and  what  they  do  pay. The  retail  in­
dustry  has  its  own  headache:  it  loses  $16 billion  a  year  to  
customers  who  buy  clothes, wear  them  with  the  tags  tucked  
in, and  return  these secondhand  clothes for  a full  refund.  
Add  to this  sundry  everyday  examples of  dishonesty—the  
congressman  accepting golfing junkets  from  his  favorite lob­
byist; the physician making kickback deals with  the laborato­
ries  that  he  uses;  the  corporate  executive who  backdates  his  
stock  options  to  boost  his  final  pay—and  you  have  a  huge  
amount  of  unsavory  economic  activity,  dramatically  larger  
than  that  of the  standard  household crooks. 
When  the  Enron  scandal  erupted  in 2001 (and  it became 
apparent   that   Enron,   as   Fortune     magazine's   "America's   
Most  Innovative  Company"  for  six consecutive years,  owed  
much  of its success to  innovations  in accounting), Nina  Ma-
zar,  On  Amir  (a professor  at  the  University of California  at  
San  Diego),  and  I  found  ourselves  discussing  the  subject of 
dishonesty  over  lunch.  Why  are  some  crimes,  particularly  
white-collar  crimes,  judged   less  severely  than   others,  we  
wondered—especially   since  their   perpetrators   can   inflict   
more  financial  damage  between  their  ten  o'clock  latte  and  
lunch  than  a standard-issue  burglar  might  in  a lifetime? 
After  some discussion  we decided that  there  might  be  two  
types of dishonesty. One  is the type of dishonesty  that  evokes  
the  image  of  a  pair  of crooks  circling a  gas  station.  As  they  
cruise  by, they  consider  how  much  money  is  in  the  till,  who  
196 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   i   
*As claimed  by the Harvard  Business  School.  
f  We often  conduct our experiments at Harvard,  not  because we  think  its  students are 
different  from MIT's students, but because  it has wonderful  facilities  and the  faculty  
members  are very generous  in  letting  us  use  them.  
197 
might  be  around  to  stop  them,  and  what  punishment   they   
may  face  if caught  (including  how  much  time  off they  might  
get  for  good  behavior). On  the  basis of this  cost-benefit  cal­
culation, they  decide whether  to rob the place or  not.  
Then  there  is  the  second  type  of  dishonesty.  This  is  the  
kind committed  by people who  generally consider themselves 
honest—the  men  and  women  (please stand)  who  have  "bor­
rowed"  a pen  from  a conference site, taken  an extra  splash of 
soda  from  the  soft  drink  dispenser,  exaggerated  the  cost of 
their  television  on  their  property  loss  report,  or  falsely  re­
ported  a  meal  with  Aunt  Enid  as  a  business  expense  (well,  
she did  inquire  about  how  work  was going). 
We know that this second kind of dishonesty exists, but  how  
prevalent  is it? Furthermore, if we put  a group of "honest"  peo­
ple into a scientifically controlled experiment and  tempted  them  
to  cheat, would  they? Would  they  compromise  their  integrity?  
Just how much would  they steal? We decided to  find  out.  
THE  HARVARD  BUSINESS  SCHOOL  holds  a place of distinc­
tion  in American  life.  Set on  the  banks  of the  River Charles 
in Cambridge, Massachusetts; housed  in imposing colonial-
style  architecture;  and  dripping  with  endowment   money,   
the  school  is  famous  for  creating  America's  top   business   
leaders.  In  the  Fortune  500  companies,  in  fact,  about  20  
percent  of  the  top  three  positions  are  held  by  graduates  of  
the Harvard  Business School.* What better place, then,  to  do  
a little experiment  on  the  issue of honesty ?t 

predictably   irrational   
The  study  would  be  fairly  simple. We would  ask  a  group  
of  Harvard  undergraduates  and MBA students  to take  a  test  
consisting  of  50  multiple-choice  questions.  The   questions   
would  be similar to those  on  standardized  tests  (What  is the 
longest  river  in  the  world?  Who  wrote  Moby-Dick}      What      
word  describes  the  average  of  a  series? Who,  in  Greek  my­
thology, was  the  goddess  of love?). The  students  would  have  
15  minutes  to  answer  the  questions.  At  the  end  of that  time,  
they  would   be  asked  to  transfer  their  answers  from   their   
worksheet  to  a scoring sheet  (called  a bubble sheet), and  sub­
mit  both  the  worksheet  and  the  bubble  sheet  to  a proctor  at  
the  front  of the  room.  For  every  correct  answer,  the  proctor  
would  hand  them  10 cents. Simple enough. 
In  another  setup  we  asked  a  new  group  of  students   to   
take  the  same  general  test,  but  with  one  important  change.  
The  students  in this  section would  take  the  test  and  transfer  
their  work  to  their  scoring  bubble  sheet,  as  the   previous   
group  did.  But  this  time  the  bubble  sheet  would  have  the  
correct  answers  pre-marked.  For  each  question,  the  bubble  
indicating  the  correct  answer  was  colored  gray.  If  the  stu­
dents  indicated  on  their  worksheet  that  the  longest  river  in  
the  world  is the  Mississippi, for  instance, once they received 
the  bubble  sheet,  they  would  clearly  see  from  the  markings  
that  the  right  answer  is the Nile. At that  point,  if the  partici­
pants  chose the wrong  answer  on their worksheet, they could 
decide  to  lie  and  mark  the  correct  answer  on  the  bubble  
sheet. 
After   they  transferred   their  answers,  they  counted   how   
many  questions  they  had  answered  correctly, wrote  that  num­
ber at the top of their bubble sheet, and handed  both the  work­
sheet  and  the  bubble  sheet  to  the  proctor  at  the  front  of  the  
198 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   i   
199 
room.  The  proctor  looked  at  the  number  of  questions  they  
claimed to have answered correctly (the summary  number  they  
wrote  at  the  top  of the  bubble  sheet)  and  paid  them  10 cents 
per correct answer. 
Would  the  students  cheat—changing  their  wrong  answers  
to  the  ones pre-marked  on  the  bubble  sheet? We weren't  sure,  
but in any case, we decided to tempt  the next group of  students  
even more. In this condition the students  would  again take  the  
test and  transfer  their answers to the pre-marked  bubble sheet. 
But  this  time  we  would  instruct  them  to  shred  their  original  
worksheet,  and  hand  only  the  bubble  sheet  to  the  proctor.  In  
other  words,  they  would  destroy  all  evidence of  any  possible  
malfeasance.   Would  they  take  the   bait?  Again,  we  didn't  
know. 
In the  final condition, we would  push the group's  integrity  
to  the  limit.  This  time  they  would  be  instructed  to  destroy  
not  only  their  original  worksheet,  but  the  final  pre-marked  
bubble  sheet  as  well. Moreover,  they  wouldn't  even  have  to  
report  their  earnings  to  the  experimenter:  When  they  were  
finished  shredding  their work  and  answer  sheets, they  merely  
needed  to  walk  up  to  the  front  of the  room—where  we  had  
placed a jar full of coins—withdraw  their earnings, and  saun-
ter  out  the  door.  If one  was  ever  inclined  to  cheat,  this  was  
the opportunity  to pull  off the perfect crime. 
Yes,  we  were  tempting  them.  We  were  making  it  easy  to  
cheat.  Would  the  crème  de  la crème of America's youth  take  
the  bait? We'd have to see. 
As  THE FIRST  group  settled into their  seats, we explained  the  
rules  and  handed   out  the  tests.  They  worked  for  their  15  

predictably   irrational   
minutes,  then  copied  their  answers  onto  the  bubble  sheet,  
and  turned  in their worksheets  and  bubble sheets. These stu­
dents  were  our  control  group.  Since  they  hadn't  been  given  
any  of the  answers,  they  had  no  opportunity  at  all to  cheat.  
On  average, they  got 32.6 of the 50 questions  right.  
What  do  you  predict  that  the  participants  in  our  other  
experimental  conditions  did?  Given  that  the  participants  in  
the  control  condition  solved  on  average  32.6 questions  cor­
rectly,  how  many  questions  do  you  think  the  participants  in  
the  other  three  conditions  claimed to  have  solved correctly? 
Condition  1  
Condition  2  
Condition  3  
Condition  4  
Control 
Self-check 
Self-check  4- shredding 
Self-check +  shredding  
+money jar 
=     32.     
What  about  the  second  group?  They  too  answered   the   
questions. But this time, when  they  transferred  their  answers  
to the bubble sheet, they could see the correct answers. Would 
they  sweep their  integrity  under the  rug  for  an extra  10 cents 
per  question?  As  it  turned  out,  this  group  claimed  to  have  
solved on  average 36.2 questions. Were they smarter than  our  
control  group?  Doubtful.  Instead,  we  had  caught  them  in  a  
bit of cheating  (by about  3.6 questions). 
What  about  the third  group? This time we upped the  ante.  
They  not  only  got  to  see  the  correct  answers  but  were  also  
asked  to  shred  their  worksheets.  Did  they  take  the  bait?  Yes,  
they  cheated.  On  average  they  claimed  to  have  solved 35.9 
questions correctly—more than  the participants  in the control 
condition, but  about  the same as the participants  in the second 
group  (the group  that  did  not  shred  their worksheets). 
200 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   i   
*The  distribution of  the number of  correctly  solved  questions  remained the  same  across  
all  four conditions,  but with  a mean  shift  when  the participants could  cheat.  
201 
Finally  came the  students  who  were  told  to  shred  not  only  
their  worksheets  but  the  bubble  sheets  as  well—and  then  dip  
their  hands  into  the  money  jar  and  withdraw  whatever  they  
deserved.  Like  angels  they  shredded  their  worksheets,  stuck  
their hands into the  money jar, and  withdrew  their coins. The 
problem  was  that  these  angels  had  dirty  faces:  their  claims  
added up to an average 36.1 correct answers—quite  a bit higher 
than  the 32.6 of our  control  group,  but  basically the  same  as  
the other two  groups  who  had  the opportunity  to cheat. 
What  did  we  learn  from  this  experiment? The  first  con­
clusion,  is  that  when   given  the  opportunity,   many   honest   
people  will cheat.  In  fact,  rather  than  finding  that  a  few  bad  
apples  weighted  the  averages,  we  discovered  that  the  major­
ity of people  cheated,  and  that  they  cheated  just  a  little  bit.*  
And  before you blame the  refined  air at the Harvard  Business  
School  for  this  level of dishonesty,  I should  add  that  we con­
ducted  similar  experiments  at  MIT, Princeton,  UCLA,  and  
Yale with  similar results. 
The  second,  and  more  counterintuitive,  result  was  even  
more  impressive:  once  tempted   to  cheat,  the   participants   
didn't  seem to  be as influenced  by the  risk of being caught  as  
one might  think.  When  the  students  were  given the  opportu­
nity  to  cheat  without  being  able  to  shred  their  papers,  they  
increased  their  correct answers  from  32.6 to  36.2.  But  when  
they  were  offered  the  chance  to  shred  their   papers—hiding   
their  little crime  completely—they  didn't  push  their  dishon­
esty  farther.  They  still cheated  at  about  the  same  level. This 
means  that  even  when  we  have  no  chance of getting  caught,  
we still don't  become wildly  dishonest.  

predictably   irrational   
When the students  could shred  both their papers,  dip  their  
hand  into  the  money  jar, and  walk  away,  every  one  of  them  
could  have  claimed  a  perfect  test  score, or  could  have  taken  
more  money  (the jar had  about  $100 in it). But none  of them 
did.   Why?  Something  held  them   back—something   inside   
them.  But what  was  it? What  is honesty,  anyhow?  
To    THAT    QUESTION,   Adam   Smith,  the   great   economic   
thinker,  had  a pleasant  reply: "Nature,  when  she formed  man  
for  society, endowed  him  with  an  original  desire  to  please,  
and  an  original  aversion  to  offend  his  bretheren.  She  taught  
him  to  feel  pleasure  in their  favourable,  and  pain  in their  un­
favourable  regard,"  he  noted.  
To  this  Smith added, "The  success of most  people ...  al­
most  always  depends  upon  the  favour  and  good  opinion  of  
their  neighbours  and  equals; and  without  a tolerably  regular  
conduct  these  can  very  seldom  be  obtained.  The  good  old  
proverb,  therefore,  that  honesty  is  always  the  best  policy,  
holds,  in  such  situations, almost  always perfectly  true."  
That  sounds  like a plausible industrial-age  explanation,  as  
balanced  and  harmonious  as  a  set  of  balance  weights  and  
perfectly  meshed  gears.  However  optimistic  this  perspective  
might  seem, Smith's theory had  a darker  corollary: since peo­
ple  engage  in  a  cost-benefit  analysis  with  regard  to  honesty,  
they  can  also  engage  in  a  cost-benefit  analysis  to  be  dishon­
est. According to this perspective, individuals  are honest  only  
to  the  extent  that  suits  them  (including their  desire  to  please  
others). 
Are  decisions about  honesty  and  dishonesty  based  on  the  
same cost-benefit analysis that  we use to decide between cars, 
cheeses, and  computers?  I don't  think  so. First of all, can  you  
202 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   i   
203 
imagine  a  friend  explaining  to  you  the  cost-benefit  analysis  
that  went into  buying his new  laptop? Of course. But can you 
imagine  your  friend  sharing  with  you  a  cost-benefit  analysis  
of  her  decision  to  steal  a  laptop?  Of course  not—not  unless  
your  friend  is a professional thief. Rather, I agree with  others  
(from   Plato   down)   who   say   that   honesty   is   something   
bigger—something that  is considered  a moral virtue  in  nearly  
every society. 
Sigmund  Freud  explained  it  this  way.  He  said  that  as  we  
grow  up  in  society, we internalize  the  social virtues. This  in­
ternalization  leads  to  the  development  of  the  superego.  In  
general,  the  superego  is pleased  when  we  comply  with  soci­
ety's ethics, and  unhappy when  we don't.  This is why  we  stop  
our  car  at four AM  when  we see a red  light, even if we  know  
that  no  one  is  around;  and  it  is  why  we  get  a  warm  feeling  
when  we return  a lost wallet to  its owner,  even if our  identity  
is  never  revealed.  Such  acts  stimulate  the  reward  centers of 
our brain—the  nucleus accumbens and the caudate  nucleus—  
and  make  us  content.  
But  if  honesty  is  important  to  us  (in  a  recent  survey  of  
nearly  36,000  high  school  students  in  the  United  States,  98  
percent  of  them  said  it  was  important  to  be  honest),  and  if  
honesty  makes  us  feel  good,  why  are  we  so  frequently  dis­
honest? 
This  is my take. We care about  honesty and  we want  to be 
honest.  The  problem  is that  our  internal  honesty  monitor  is  
active  only  when   we  contemplate   big  transgressions,  like  
grabbing  an  entire box of pens  from  the  conference hall. For 
the  little transgressions, like taking  a single pen  or two  pens,  
we  don't  even  consider  how  these  actions  would  reflect  on  
our  honesty  and  so our  superego  stays asleep. 
Without  the  superego's  help,  monitoring,  and   managing   

predictably  irrational  
of  our  honesty, the  only defense  we have against this kind of 
transgression  is  a  rational  cost-benefit  analysis. But who  is  
going  to  consciously  weigh  the  benefits  of  taking  a  towel  
from  a  hotel  room  versus  the  cost of being  caught? Who  is  
going to  consider  the  costs and  benefits  of adding  a  few  re­
ceipts  to  a  tax  statement?  As  we  saw  in  the  experiment  at  
Harvard,  the  cost-benefit  analysis,  and  the  probability  of  
getting  caught  in  particular,  does  not  seem  to  have  much  
influence  on  dishonesty.  
THIS   IS  THE  way  the  world  turns.  It's  almost  impossible  to  
open  a  newspaper  without  seeing  a  report  of  a  dishonest  or  
deceptive  act.  We  watch  as  the  credit  card  companies  bleed  
their  customers  with  outrageous  interest  rate  hikes;  as  the  
airlines  plunge  into  bankruptcy  and  then  call  on  the  federal  
government   to  get  them—and   their  underfunded   pension   
funds—out  of trouble;  and  as schools defend  the presence of 
soda  machines on campus  (and rake in millions from  the  soft  
drinks  firms)  all the  while knowing  that  sugary  drinks  make  
kids  hyperactive  and  fat.  Taxes  are  a  festival of eroding  eth­
ics,  as  the  insightful  and  talented  reporter  David  Cay John­
ston  of the  New   York    Times   describes  in  his  book    Perfectly    
Legal:   The  Covert    Campaign    to  Rig  Our  Tax  System   to   Ben­
efit  the  Super   Rich—and       Cheat    Everybody       Else.       
Against  all of this, society, in the  form  of the  government,  
has battled back, at least to some extent. The Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act  of  2002  (which  requires  the  chief  executives  of  public  
companies  to  vouch  for  the  firms'  audits  and  accounts)  was  
passed  to  make  debacles  like  Enron's  a  thing  of  the  past.  
Congress  has  also passed  restrictions on  "earmarking"  (spe­
cifically  the  pork-barrel  spending  that  politicians  insert  into  
204 

the  context  of  our  character,   part   i   
205 
larger  federal  bills).  The  Securities and  Exchange Commis­
sion even passed requirements  for additional  disclosure  about  
executives'  pay  and  perks—so  that  when  we  see  a  stretch  
limo  carrying  a Fortune  500 executive, we  know  pretty  cer­
tainly how  much  the corporate  chief  inside  is getting  paid.  
But  can  external  measures  like  these  really  plug  all  the  
holes  and  prevent  dishonesty?  Some  critics  say  they  can't.  
Take  the  ethics  reforms  in  Congress, for  instance. The  stat­
utes  ban  lobbyists  from  serving  free  meals  to  congressmen  
and  their  aides  at  "widely  attended"  functions.  So what  have  
lobbyists done? Invited  congressmen to luncheons  with  "lim­
ited"  guest  lists  that  circumvent  the  rule.  Similarly, the  new  
ethics  laws  ban  lobbyists from  flying congressmen  in  "fixed-
wing"  aircraft.  So hey, how  about  a lift  in  a helicopter? 
The  most  amusing  new  law  I've heard  about  is called  the  
"toothpick  rule." It states that  although  lobbyists can no  lon­
ger provide  sit-down  meals to congressmen, the lobbyists can 
still  serve  anything  (presumably  hors  d'oeuvres)  which  the  
legislators  can  eat  while  standing   up,  plopping   into  their  
mouths  using their  fingers  or  a  toothpick.  
Did  this  change  the  plans  of the  seafood  industry,  which  
had  organized  a  sit-down  pasta  and  oyster  dinner  for  Wash­
ington's  legislators  (called—you  guessed  it—"Let the  World  
Be  Your  Oyster")? Not  by  much.  The  seafood  lobbyists  did  
drop  the  pasta  dish  (too  messy  to  fork  up  with  a toothpick), 
but  still  fed  the  congressmen  well  with  freshly  opened  raw  
oysters  (which the congressmen  slurped  down standing  up) .
16 
Sarbanes-Oxley  has  also  been  called  ineffectual.  Some  
critics  say that  it's rigid  and  inflexible, but  the  loudest  outcry  
is from  those who  call  it ambiguous, inconsistent, inefficient, 
and  outrageously  expensive  (especially for  smaller  firms).  "It  
hasn't  cleaned  up  corruption,"  argued  William A.  Niskanen,  

predictably  irrational  
chairman  of the Cato Institute; "it has only forced companies 
to jump  through  hoops."  
So  much  for  enforcing honesty  through  external controls. 
They  may work  in some cases, but  not  in others. Could  there  
be  a better  cure for  dishonesty?  
BEFORE  I  EVEN  attempt  to  answer  that  question,  let  me  de­
scribe  an  experiment  we  conducted  that  speaks  volumes  on  
the  subject.  A  few  years  ago  Nina,  On,  and   I  brought   a   
group  of participants  together  in  a  lab  at  UCLA  and  asked  
them  to  take  a  simple  math  test.  The  test  consisted  of 20 
simple  problems,  each  requiring  participants   to   find   two   
numbers  that  would  add  up  to  10 (for  a sample problem,  see  
the  table  below). They  had  five minutes  to  solve  as  many of 
the  problems  as  they  could,  after  which  they  were  entered  
into  a lottery. If they  won  the  lottery, they  would  receive ten 
dollars  for  each problem  they  solved correctly. 
As   in  our  experiment  at  the  Harvard   Business  School,  
some  of  the  participants  handed  in  their  papers  directly  to  
the  experimenter.  They  were  our  control  group.  The  other  
participants  wrote  down  on  another   sheet  the  number  of  
questions  they  solved  correctly,  and   then   disposed  of  the  
originals.  These participants,  obviously,  were  the  ones  with  
Look  at  your watch, note the time,  and  start  searching  for  two  
numbers  in the  matrix  below  that  will  add  up to  exactly  10.  
How  long  did  it take  you?  
1.69 1.82 2.91 
4.67 
4.81 3.05 
5.82 
5.06 
4.28 
6.36 5.19 
4.57 
206 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   i   
207 
the opportunity  to cheat. So, given this opportunity,  did  these  
participants  cheat? As you  may have surmised,  they  did  (but,  
of  course, just by  a bit). 
Up  to  now  I have  not  told  you  anything  new.  But the  key  
to  this  experiment  was  what  preceded  it. When  the  partici­
pants  first  came  to  the  lab,  we  asked  some  of them  to  write  
down  the  names  of  10 books  that  they  read  in  high  school.  
The  others  were  asked  to  write  down  as  many  of  the  Ten  
Commandments   as  they  could  recall.
51
"  After  they   finished   
this  "memory" part of the experiment,  we asked  them  to  be­
gin working  on  the matrix  task.  
This  experimental  setup  meant  that  some  of the  partici­
pants  were  tempted  to  cheat  after  recalling  10  books  that  
they  read  in high  school, and  some of them  were tempted  af­
ter  recalling  the  Ten  Commandments.  Who  do  you  think  
cheated more ? 
When  cheating  was  not  possible, our  participants,  on  av­
erage,  solved 3.1 problems correctly^ 
When  cheating  was  possible,  the  group  that  recalled  10  
books  read  in  high  school  achieved  an  average  score  of 4.1 
questions  solved  (or 33 percent  more  than  those  who  could  
not cheat). 
But the big question  is what happened  to the other  group—  
the  students  who  first  wrote  down  the  Ten  Commandments,  
then took the test, and  then  ripped  up their worksheets.  This,  
as  sportscasters  say,  was  the  group  to  watch.  Would  they  
cheat—or  would  the  Ten  Commandments  have  an  effect  on  
*Do  you  know  the Ten Commandments? If you'd  like  to  test yourself,  write them  down  
and compare  your list  with  the  list  at the end  of  this  chapter.  To  be  sure you  have  them  
right, don't  just say them to yourself; write them  down.  
tCan  the Ten Commandments raise one's  math scores? We used  the same two  memory  
tasks  with  the control condition  to test that  premise. The performance in  the control 
condition  was  the same regardless of the type  of memory task. So  the Commandments 
do  not  raise math scores. 

predictably   irrational   
their  integrity?  The  result  surprised   even  us:  the   students   
who  had  been  asked  to  recall the  Ten  Commandments  had  
not cheated at all. They averaged three correct answers—the 
same  basic score as  the  group  that  could  not  cheat,  and  one  
less  than  those  who  were  able to  cheat  but  had  recalled  the  
names of the books. 
As  I  walked  home  that  evening  I  began  to  think  about  
what  had  just  happened.  The  group  who  listed  10  books  
cheated. Not  a lot, certainly—only to  that  point  where  their  
internal  reward  mechanism  (nucleus  accumbens  and  super­
ego)  kicked in and  rewarded  them  for  stopping.  
But  what  a  miracle the Ten Commandments  had  wrought!  
We  didn't  even  remind  our  participants  what  the  Command­
ments were—we just asked each participant to recall them  (and  
almost  none of the participants  could  recall all  10).  We hoped 
the exercise might evoke the idea of honesty among them. And 
this  was  clearly  what  it  did.  So, we  wondered,  what  lessons  
about  decreasing  dishonesty  can  we  learn  from  this  experi­
ment? It took us a few weeks to come to some conclusions. 
FOR  ONE,  PERHAPS  we could bring the Bible back into public 
life.  If we  only  want  to  reduce  dishonesty,  it  might  not  be  a  
bad  idea.  Then  again,  some  people  might  object,  on  the  
grounds  that  the Bible implies an endorsement of a particular 
religion, or  merely that  it mixes religion in with  the commer­
cial  and  secular  world.  But  perhaps  an  oath  of  a  different  
nature  would  work. What especially impressed  me about  the  
experiment  with  the  Ten  Commandments  was  that  the  stu­
dents  who could remember only one or two  Commandments  
were  as  affected  by  them  as  the  students  who  remembered  
nearly  all ten.  This indicated  that  it was  not  the  Command-
208 

the  context  of   our  character,  part   i   
209 
merits themselves that  encouraged  honesty, but the  mere con­
templation  of a moral  benchmark  of some  kind.  
If  that  were  the  case,  then  we could  also  use  nonreligious  
benchmarks to raise the general level of honesty. For instance, 
what  about  the professional  oaths  that  doctors, lawyers,  and  
others  swear  to—or  used  to  swear  to?  Could  those  profes­
sional oaths  do  the trick? 
The  word   profession      comes  from   the  Latin       professus,       
meaning  "affirmed  publicly." Professions  started  somewhere  
deep  in  the  past  in  religion  and  then  spread  to  medicine  and  
law.  Individuals  who  had  mastered  esoteric  knowledge,  it  
was  said,  not  only  had  a  monopoly  on  the  practice  of  that  
knowledge,  but  had  an  obligation  to  use  their  power  wisely  
and  honestly.  The  oath—spoken  and  often  written—was  a  
reminder  to practitioners  to regulate  their own  behavior,  and  
it  also  provided  a  set of rules  that  had  to  be  followed  in  ful­
filling the  duties  of their  profession.  
Those  oaths  lasted  a  long time. But then,  in  the  1960s,  a  
strong movement  arose to deregulate  professions. Professions 
were  elitist  organizations,  it  was  argued,  and  needed  to  be  
turned  out  into  the  light of day. For the  legal profession  that  
meant  more  briefs written  in plain  English prose, cameras  in  
the  courtrooms,  and  advertising.  Similar  measures  against  
elitism  were  applied  to  medicine, banking,  and  other  profes­
sions  as  well.  Much  of  this  could  have  been  beneficial,  but  
something  was  lost when  professions  were dismantled.  Strict  
professionalism  was  replaced  by  flexibility,  individual  judg­
ment,  the  laws  of  commerce,  and  the  urge  for  wealth,  and  
with  it disappeared  the bedrock of ethics and values on  which  
the professions  had  been  built.  
A study  by the  state bar of California  in the  1990s,  for  in­
stance, found  that  a preponderance  of attorneys  in California 

predictably   irrational   
were  sick  of  the  decline  in  honor  in  their  work  and   "pro­
foundly  pessimistic" about  the  condition  of the  legal  profes­
sion.  Two-thirds  said  that  lawyers  today  "compromise  their  
professionalism  as  a result  of economic pressure."  Nearly 80 
percent  said  that  the  bar  "fails to  adequately  punish  unethi­
cal  attorneys."  Half  said  they  wouldn't  become  attorneys if 
they had  it to  do  over  again.
17  
A  comparable  study  by  the  Maryland  Judicial Task  Force  
found  similar distress  among  lawyers  in  that  state. According 
to  Maryland's  lawyers,  their  profession  had  degenerated  so  
badly  that  "they  were  often  irritable,  short-tempered,   argu­
mentative,  and  verbally  abusive"  or  "detached,   withdrawn,   
preoccupied,  or  distracted."  When  lawyers  in  Virginia  were  
asked  whether  the  increasing  problems  with  professionalism  
were  attributable  to  "a  few  bad  apples"  or  to  a  widespread  
trend,  they overwhelmingly  said this was  a widespread  issue.
18   
Lawyers  in Florida  have  been  deemed  the worst.
19
  In  2003  
the  Florida bar  reported  that  a  "substantial  minority"  of law­
yers were "money-grabbing, too clever, tricky, sneaky, and  not  
trustworthy;  who  had  little  regard  for  the  truth  or  fairness,  
willing  to  distort,  manipulate,  and  conceal to  win;  arrogant,  
condescending,  and  abusive."  They  were  also  "pompous  and  
obnoxious." What  more can  I say? 
The  medical  profession  has  its  critics  as  well. The critics 
mention doctors who do unnecessary  surgeries and  other  pro­
cedures just to boost the bottom  line: who  order  tests at labo­
ratories that  are  giving them  kickbacks, and  who  lean  toward  
medical tests on equipment  that  they just happen to own.  And  
what  about  the  influence  of  the  pharmaceutical  industry?  A  
friend  of mine  said  he  sat  waiting  for  his  doctor  for  an  hour  
recently. During that time, he said, four  (very attractive)  repre­
sentatives  of drug  companies  went  freely  into  and  out  of  the  
210 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   i   
office,   bringing  lunch,  free  samples,  and   other   gifts   with   
them. 
You  could  look  at  almost  any  professional  group  and  see  
signs of similar problems. How  about  the  Association of Pe­
troleum  Geologists, for  instance? The  image  I see  is  Indiana  
Jones  types,  with  more  interest  in  discussing  Jurassic  shale  
and  deltaic deposits  than  in  making  a buck. But look  deeper  
and you'll  find trouble. "There is unethical behavior going on 
at  a much  larger  scale than  most of us  would  care to  think,"  
one member of the  association wrote  to  her colleagues.
20 
What kind of dishonesty, for goodness' sake, could be rife in 
the  ranks  of petroleum  geologists, you  ask? Apparently  things  
like  using  bootlegged  seismic and  digital  data;  stealing  maps  
and  materials; and  exaggerating the  promise of certain  oil  de­
posits,  in  cases where  a  land  sale or  investment  is being  made.  
"The  malfeasance  is most  frequently  of shades  of gray,  rather  
than  black and  white," one petroleum  geologist remarked. 
But   let's  remember   that   petroleum   geologists  are   not   
alone.  This  decline  in  professionalism  is  everywhere.  If  you  
need  more proof,  consider the  debate  within  the  field of pro­
fessional  ethicists, who  are  called  more  often  than  ever  be­
fore  to  testify  at  public  hearings  and  trials,  where  they  may  
be  hired  by  one  party  or  another  to  consider  issues  such  as  
treatment  rendered  to  a patient  and  the  rights  of the  unborn.  
Are  they  tempted  to  bend  to  the  occasion? Apparently  so.  
"Moral  Expertise:  A  Problem  in  the  Professional  Ethics of 
Professional  Ethicists" is  the  title  of  one  article  in  an  ethics  
journal.
21
  As I said, the  signs of erosion  are  everywhere.  
WHAT   TO  DO?  Suppose  that,  rather  than  invoking  the  Ten  
Commandments,  we  got  into  the  habit  of signing  our  name  
211 

predictably   irrational   
to  some  secular  statement—similar  to  a professional  oath—  
that  would  remind  us of our  commitment  to  honesty.  Would  
a  simple  oath  make  a  difference,  in  the  way  that  we  saw  the  
Ten  Commandments  make  a  difference?  We  needed  to  find  
out—hence  our  next  experiment.  
Once  again  we  assembled  our  participants.  In  this  study,  
the  first  group of participants  took  our  matrix  math  test  and  
handed  in  their  answers  to  the  experimenter  in  the  front  of  
the  room  (who  counted  how  many  questions  they  answered  
correctly  and  paid  them  accordingly). The second group also 
took  the test, but  the  members of this group were told to  fold  
their  answer  sheet,  keep  it  in  their  possession,  and  tell  the  
experimenter  in the front  of the room  how  many of the  prob­
lems they got right. The experimenter paid  them  accordingly,  
and  they  were  on  their  way.  
The  novel  aspect  of  this  experiment  had  to  do  with  the  
third  group.  Before  these  participants  began,  each  was  asked  
to  sign the  following statement  on  the  answer  sheet: "I under­
stand  that this study falls under the MIT honor  system." After 
signing this statement, they continued with the task. When  the  
time had  elapsed they pocketed their  answer  sheets, walked  to  
the  front  of the  room,  told  the  experimenter  how  many  prob­
lems they had  correctly solved, and  were paid  accordingly.  
What  were  the  results? In the  control condition,  in  which  
cheating  was  not  possible,  participants   solved  on   average   
three problems  (out of 20).  In the  second condition,  in  which  
the  participants  could  pocket  their  answers,  they  claimed  to  
have  solved  on  average  5.5 problems.  What  was  remarkable  
was  the  third  situation—in  which  the  participants  pocketed  
their answer  sheets, but  had  also signed the honor  code state­
ment.  In  this  case  they  claimed  to  have  solved,  on  average,  
three  problems—exactly  the  same  number   as  the  control  
212 

the  context  of   our  character,  part   i   
213 
group.  This  outcome  was  similar  to  the  results  we  achieved  
with   the   Ten   Commandments—when    a   moral   reminder   
eliminated  cheating  altogether. The  effect  of signing  a  state­
ment  about  an  honor  code  is particularly  amazing  when  we  
take  into  account  that  MIT  doesn't   even  have  an   honor   
code. 
So  we learned  that  people  cheat  when  they  have  a chance 
to  do  so, but  they  don't  cheat  as  much  as  they  could. More­
over,  once  they  begin  thinking  about  honesty—whether  by  
recalling  the  Ten  Commandments   or  by  signing  a  simple  
statement—they  stop  cheating  completely.  In  other  words,  
when   we   are   removed   from   any   benchmarks   of  ethical  
thought,  we  tend  to  stray  into  dishonesty.  But  if  we  are  re­
minded  of morality  at  the  moment  we  are  tempted,  then  we  
are much  more  likely to  be  honest.  
At  present,  several  state  bars  and  professional  organiza­
tions  are  scrambling  to  shore  up  their  professional  ethics.  
Some  are  increasing courses  in  college and  graduate schools, 
and  others  are  requiring  brush-up  ethics  classes.  In  the  legal  
profession, Judge Dennis M.  Sweeney of the Howard  County  
(Maryland)  circuit  published  his  own  book,  Guidelines      for      
Lawyer    Courtroom     Conduct,    in which he noted, "Most rules, 
like  these,  are  simply  what  our  mothers  would  say  a  polite  
and  well  raised  man  or  woman  should  do.  Since,  given  their  
other important  responsibilities, our mothers  (and yours) can­
not  be in every courtroom  in the State,  I offer  these rules." 
Will  such  general  measures  work? Let's remember  that  law­
yers do take an  oath  when  they are admitted  to the bar, as doc­
tors take an oath when they enter their profession. But occasional 
swearing  of  oaths  and  occasional  statements  of  adherence  to  
rules  are  not  enough.  From  our  experiments,  it  is  clear  that  
oaths  and  rules  must  be recalled at, or just before, the  moment  

predictably   irrational   
of  temptation.  Also, what  is more, time is working against  us as 
we try to curb this problem. I said in Chapter 4 that  when social 
norms collide with market norms, the social norms go away  and  
the market norms  stay. Even if the analogy is not exact, honesty 
offers  a related lesson: once professional ethics (the social norms) 
have declined, getting them  back won't  be easy. 
THIS  DOESN'T  MEAN that  we shouldn't  try. Why is honesty  so  
important?  For  one  thing,  let's  not  forget  that  the  United  
States holds  a position  of economic power  in  the  world  today  
partly  because  it  is  (or  at  least  is perceived  to  be)  one  of  the  
world's  most  honest  nations,  in  terms  of its standards of cor­
porate  governance.  
In 2002,  the  United  States ranked  twentieth  in  the  world  
in terms of integrity, according to one survey  (Denmark, Fin­
land,  and  New  Zealand  were  first;  Haiti,  Iraq,  Myanmar,  
and Somalia were last, at number  163). On this basis, I would 
suspect  that  people  doing  business  with  the  United  States  
generally  feel  they can  get  a fair deal. But the  fact of the  mat­
ter is that  the United States ranked  fourteenth  in 2000,  before  
the  wave  of  corporate  scandals  made  the  business  pages  in  
American  newspapers  look like a police blotter.
22
 We are go­
ing  down  the  slippery  slope,  in  other  words,  not  up  it,  and  
this  can  have tremendous  long-term costs. 
Adam  Smith  reminded  us  that  honesty  really  is  the  best  
policy,  especially  in  business.  To  get  a  glimpse  at  the  other  
side  of that  realization—at  the  downside,  in  a  society  with­
out  trust—you  can take  a look at several countries. In China, 
the word  of one person  in one region rarely carries to  another  
region.  Latin  America  is full  of family-run  cartels that  hand  
out  loans to  relatives  (and  then  fail to cut off credit  when  the  
214 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   i   
215 
debtor  begins to default). Iran  is another  example of a  nation  
stricken  by distrust.  An  Iranian  student  at MIT told  me  that  
business  there  lacks  a  platform  of trust.  Because  of this,  no  
one pays  in  advance, no  one offers  credit,  and  no  one  is will­
ing to take risks. People must hire within  their families, where 
some level of trust still exists. Would you like to live in  such  a  
world?  Be  careful,  because  without   honesty  we  might  get  
there  faster  than  you'd  imagine.  
What  can  we do to keep our  country  honest? We can  read  
the Bible, the Koran, or whatever  reflects our values,  perhaps.  
We can revive professional  standards.  We can  sign our  names  
to promises that  we will act with  integrity. Another path is to 
first  recognize  that  when  we  get  into  situations  where  our  
personal  financial  benefit  stands  in  opposition  to  our  moral  
standards,   we  are  able  to  "bend"  reality,  see  the  world  in  
terms  compatible  with  our  selfish  interest,  and  become  dis­
honest. What  is the  answer,  then? If we recognize this  weak­
ness, we can try  to  avoid  such  situations  from  the  outset. We 
can  prohibit  physicians  from  ordering  tests that  would  bene­
fit  them  financially;  we  can  prohibit  accountants  and  audi­
tors  from  functioning  as consultants  to  the  same  companies;  
we can  bar  members of Congress from  setting their  own  sal­
aries, and  so  on.  
But  this  is  not  the  end  of  the  issue  of  dishonesty.  In  the  
next  chapter,  I  will  offer  some  other  suggestions  about  dis­
honesty,  and   some  other  insights  into  how   we   struggle   
with  it.  

APPENDIX:  CHAPTER  11  
The  Ten    Commandments    
I  am  the  Lord  your  God,  you  shall  have  
no  other  gods  before  me.  
You  shall not  take  the name  of the  Lord  your  God  in  vain.  
Keep  holy the  Sabbath  day.  
Honor  your  father  and  your  mother.  
You  shall not  kill.  
You  shall not  commit  adultery.  
You  shall not  steal.  
You  shall not  bear  false  witness.  
You  shall not  covet your  neighbor's  wife.  
You  shall not  covet your  neighbor's  goods.  
216 

The  Context of Our 
Character, Part II 
Why  Dealing    with  Cash  Makes   Us More    Honest    
M
any  of  the  dormitories  at  MIT  have  common  areas,  
where  sit  a variety  of refrigerators  that  can  be  used  by  
the  students  in  the  nearby  rooms.  One  morning  at  about  
eleven, when  most of the students  were in class,  I slipped  into  
the dorms  and,  floor by floor, went hunting  for all the  shared  
refrigerators  that  I could  find.  
When  I  detected  a  communal  fridge,  I  inched  toward  it.  
Glancing  cautiously  around,  I opened  the  door,  slipped  in  a  
six-pack  of  Coke,  and  walked  briskly  away.  At  a  safe  dis­
tance,  I paused  and  jotted down the  time and  the location of 
the fridge  where  I had  left  my Cokes. 
Over  the  next  few  days  I returned  to  check on  my  Coke  
cans.  I kept  a diary  detailing how  many  of them  remained  in  
the fridge. As you might expect, the half-life of Coke in  a col­
lege dorm  isn't very long. All of them  had  vanished within 72 
hours. But I didn't  always leave Cokes behind. In some of the 

predictably   irrational   
fridges,  I  left  a  plate  containing  six  one-dollar  bills.  Would  
the  money  disappear  faster  than  the Cokes? 
Before  I  answer  that  question,  let  me  ask  you  one.  Sup­
pose  your  spouse  calls  you  at  work.  Your  daughter  needs  a  
red  pencil  for  school  the  next  day.  "Could  you  bring  one  
home?"  How  comfortable  would  you  be  taking  a  red  pencil  
from  work  for  your  daughter?  Very  uncomfortable?  Some­
what  uncomfortable?  Completely  comfortable?  
Let  me  ask  you  another  question.  Suppose  there  are  no  
red  pencils  at  work,  but  you  can  buy  one  downstairs  for  a  
dime.  And  the  petty  cash  box  in  your  office  has  been  left  
open,  and  no  one  is  around.  Would  you  take  10 cents  from  
the  petty  cash  box to  buy  the  red  pencil? Suppose  you  didn't  
have  any  change  and  needed  the  10  cents.  Would  you  feel  
comfortable  taking  it? Would  that  be OK? 
I  don't  know  about  you,  but  while  I'd  find  taking  a  red  
pencil  from  work  relatively  easy,  I'd  have  a  very  hard  time  
taking  the  cash.  (Luckily for  me,  I haven't  had  to  face  this is­
sue, since my daughter  is not  in  school yet.) 
As  it  turns  out,  the  students  at MIT  also  felt  differently  
about  taking  cash. As  I mentioned,  the  cans of Coke quickly 
disappeared;  within  72  hours  every  one  of  them  was  gone.  
But what  a different  story  with  the  money! The plates of dol­
lar  bills  remained  untouched  for  72  hours,  until  I  removed  
them  from  the  refrigerators.  
So what's  going on  here?  
When  we  look  at  the  world  around  us,  much  of  the  dis­
honesty  we  see  involves  cheating  that  is  one  step  removed  
from  cash. Companies  cheat  with  their  accounting practices; 
executives  cheat  by  using  backdated  stock  options;  lobbyists  
cheat  by  underwriting   parties  for  politicians;  drug  compa­
nies  cheat  by  sending  doctors  and  their  wives  off  on  posh  
218 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   ii   
219 
vacations. To be sure, these people don't  cheat with  cold cash 
(except  occasionally).  And  that's  my  point:  cheating  is  a  lot  
easier  when  it's  a step removed  from  money.  
Do  you  think  that  the  architects  of  Enron's  collapse—  
Kenneth  Lay, Jeffrey  Skilling, and  Andrew  Fastow—would  
have  stolen  money  from  the purses  of old women?  Certainly,  
they took  millions of dollars  in pension  monies  from  a lot of 
old  women.  But do  you  think  they  would  have  hit  a  woman  
with  a  blackjack  and  pulled  the  cash  from  her  fingers? You 
may disagree, but  my inclination  is to  say no. 
So  what  permits  us  to  cheat  when  cheating  involves  non­
monetary  objects,  and  what  restrains  us when  we are  dealing  
with  money? How  does that  irrational  impulse  work?  
BECAUSE  WE ARE  SO adept  at rationalizing  our  petty  dishon­
esty, it's often  hard  to get a clear picture of how  nonmonetary  
objects  influence  our  cheating.  In  taking  a pencil, for  exam­
ple, we might  reason that  office  supplies  are part of our  over­
all  compensation,  or  that   lifting  a  pencil  or  two   is  what  
everyone does. We might  say that  taking  a can of Coke  from  
a  communal  refrigerator  from  time  to  time  is  all  right,  be­
cause,  after  all,  we've  all  had  cans  of  Coke  taken  from  us.  
Maybe  Lay, Skilling, and  Fastow  thought  that  cooking  the  
books  at  Enron  was  OK,  since  it  was  a  temporary  measure  
that   could   be   corrected   when   business   improved.   Who   
knows ? 
To  get at the true nature  of dishonesty, then,  we needed  to  
develop  a clever experiment, one  in which the  object  in  ques­
tion would  allow few excuses. Nina, On, and  I thought  about  
it. Suppose  we  used  symbolic currency, such  as tokens. They 
were  not  cash,  but  neither  were  they  objects  with  a  history,  

predictably   irrational   
like  a  Coke  or  a  pencil.  Would  it  give  us  insight  into  the  
cheating process? We weren't  sure,  but  it seemed reasonable; 
and  so, a  few years ago, we gave it a  try.  
This  is what  happened. As the  students at one of the MIT 
cafeterias  finished  their  lunches,  we  interrupted  them  to  ask  
whether  they  would  like  to  participate  in  a  five-minute  ex­
periment.  All  they  had  to  do,  we  explained,  was  solve 20 
simple math  problems  (finding two numbers  that added  up  to  
10).  And  for this they  would  get 50 cents per  correct  answer.  
The  experiment  began  similarly  in  each  case,  but  ended  
in  one of three  different  ways. When  the  participants  in  the  
first  group  finished  their tests, they took their worksheets  up  
to  the  experimenter,  who  tallied  their  correct  answers  and  
paid  them  50 cents  for  each. The  participants  in  the  second  
group  were  told  to tear  up  their  worksheets,  stuff  the  scraps  
into  their  pockets  or  backpacks, and  simply  tell  the  experi­
menter  their  score  in  exchange  for  payment.  So far  this ex­
periment  was  similar to the  tests of honesty  described  in  the  
previous  chapter.  
But the participants  in the last group had  something signifi­
cantly  different  in their  instructions. We told them,  as we  had  
told  the  previous  group,  to tear  up  the  worksheets  and  simply  
tell  the  experimenter  how  many  questions  they  had  answered  
correctly.  But  this  time,  the  experimenter  wouldn't  be  giving  
them  cash. Rather, she would  give them  a token  for each ques­
tion  they  claimed  to  have  solved.  The  students  would   then   
walk  12  feet  across  the  room  to  another  experimenter,  who  
would  exchange each token  for 50 cents. 
Do  you  see what  we were  doing? Would the  insertion  of a 
token  into  the  transaction—a  piece  of  valueless,  nonmone­
tary  currency—affect  the  students'  honesty?  Would  the  to­
ken  make  the  students  less  honest  in  tallying  their  answers  
220 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   ii   
''Theoretically,  it  is  possible  that  some  people  solved  all  the problems. But since  no  one  
in  the  control  conditions  solved  more  than  10 problems, the likelihood  that  four of  our  
participants  truly  solved  20  is  very,  very low.  For this  reason we  assumed  that  they  
cheated. 
221 
than  the  students  who  received  cash  immediately?  If so,  by  
how  much ? 
Even we were  surprised  by the results: The participants  in  
the  first  group  (who  had  no  way  to  cheat)  solved  an  average  
of  3.5 questions correctly  (they were our  control  group).  
The  participants  in  the  second  group,  who  tore  up  their  
worksheets,  claimed  to  have  correctly  solved  an  average of 
6.2  questions.  Since  we  can  assume  that  these  students   did   
not  become  smarter  merely  by  tearing  up  their  worksheets,  
we can  attribute  the 2.7 additional  questions  they  claimed  to  
have  solved to  cheating.  
But  in  terms  of  brazen  dishonesty,  the  participants  in  the  
third  group  took  the  cake.  They  were  no  smarter  than  the  
previous two  groups,  but  they claimed to have  solved an  aver­
age of 9.4 problems—5.9 more than  the control group  and 3.2 
more than  the  group  that  merely ripped  up  the  worksheets.  
This  means that  when  given  a chance to cheat under  ordi­
nary  circumstances, the  students  cheated, on  average,  by 2.7 
questions. But when  they were given the same chance to cheat 
with   nonmonetary   currency,   their   cheating   increased   to   
5.9—more  than  doubling  in  magnitude.  What  a  difference  
there  is in  cheating  for  money  versus  cheating  for  something  
that  is a step  away  from  cash!  
If  that  surprises  you,  consider  this. Of  the  2,000  partici­
pants  in  our  studies  of  honesty  (described  in  the  previous  
chapter),  only  four  ever  claimed to  have  solved  all  the  prob­
lems.  In other  words,  the  rate of "total cheating" was  four  in  
2,000.* 

predictably   irrational   
But  in  the  experiment  in  which  we  inserted  nonmonetary  
currency   (the  token),  24  of  the   study's  450   participants   
cheated  "all the  way." How  many  of these 24 extreme cheat­
ers  were  in  the  condition  with  money  versus  the  condition  
with  tokens? They were  all in  the  token  condition  (24 of 150 
students cheated "all the way"  in this condition; this  is equiv­
alent  to  about  320 per  2,000  participants).  This  means  that  
not  only  did  the  tokens  "release" people  from  some of  their  
moral  constraints,  but  for  quite  a  few  of them,  the  extent of 
the release was so complete that they cheated  as much  as was 
possible. 
This  level of cheating is clearly bad,  but  it could have been 
worse.  Let's  not  forget  that  the  tokens  in  our  experiments  
were transformed  into cash within  a matter of seconds. What 
would  the  rate of dishonesty  have  been  if the  transfer  from  a  
nonmonetary   token   to   cash  took   a  few   days,  weeks,  or  
months   (as,  for  instance,  in  a  stock  option)?  Would  even  
more people cheat, and  to  a larger extent? 
WE   HAVE   LEARNED  that  given  a  chance,  people  cheat.  But  
what's  really  odd  is  that  most  of  us  don't  see  this  coming.  
When  we  asked  students  in  another  experiment  to  predict if 
people  would  cheat  more  for  tokens  than  for  cash,  the  stu­
dents  said  no,  the  amount  of  cheating  would  be  the  same.  
After  all, they explained, the tokens represented  real money— 
and  the  tokens  were  exchanged  within  seconds  for  actual  
cash.  And  so,  they  predicted,  our  participants  would  treat  
the tokens  as real cash. 
But  how  wrong  they  were!  They  didn't  see  how  fast  we  
can  rationalize  our  dishonesty  when  it  is one  step  away  from  
cash.  Of  course,  their  blindness  is  ours  as  well.  Perhaps  it's  
222 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   ii   
223 
why  so much  cheating goes on. Perhaps  it's why Jeff Skilling, 
Bernie  Ebbers, and  the  entire  roster  of executives who  have  
been prosecuted  in recent years let themselves, and their com­
panies, slide down the  slope.  
All of us are vulnerable to this weakness, of course. Think 
about  all the insurance fraud  that  goes on. It is estimated  that  
when  consumers  report  losses on  their  homes  and  cars, they 
creatively stretch their claims by about  10 percent. (Of course, 
as  soon  as  you  report   an  exaggerated  loss,  the   insurance   
company  raises its rates, so the  situation  becomes tit for tat). 
Again  it  is  not  the  case that  there  are  many  claims that  are  
completely  flagrant,  but  instead  many  people  who  have  lost,  
say,  a  27-inch  television  set  report  the  loss  of  a  32-inch  set;  
those who  have  lost  a 32-inch  set report  the  loss of a  36-inch  
set, and  so on. These same people  would  be unlikely to  steal  
money directly from  the insurance companies  (as tempting  as  
that  might  sometimes be), but  reporting  what  they  no  longer  
have—and  increasing  its  size  and  value  by  just  a  little  bit—  
makes the  moral  burden easier to  bear.  
There are other interesting practices. Have you  ever  heard  
the  term  "wardrobing"  ?  Wardrobing  is  buying  an  item  of  
clothing, wearing  it for  a while, and  then  returning  it in  such  
a  state that  the  store  has  to  accept it  but  can  no  longer  resell  
it.  By  engaging  in  wardrobing,  consumers  are  not  directly  
stealing  money  from  the  company;  instead,  it  is  a  dance of 
buying  and  returning,  with  many  unclear  transactions  in­
volved. But there is at least one clear consequence—the cloth­
ing industry  estimates that  its annual  losses from  wardrobing  
are  about  $16  billion  (about  the  same  amount   as  the  esti­
mated   annual   loss  from   home  burglaries   and   automobile   
theft combined). 
And  how  about  expense  reports?  When  people  are  on  

predictably   irrational   
business trips,  they  are expected to know  what  the  rules  are,  
but  expense  reports  too  are  one  step,  and  sometimes  even  a  
few  steps, removed  from  cash. In one study, Nina  and  I  found  
that  not  all  expenses  are  alike  in  terms  of people's  ability  to  
justify   them   as  business  expenses.  For  example,  buying  a  
mug  for five dollars  for  an  attractive  stranger  was  clearly out 
of bounds,  but  buying the same stranger  an eight-dollar  drink  
in  a  bar  was  very  easy to  justify. The  difference  was  not  the  
cost  of  the  item,  or  the  fear  of  getting  caught,  but  people's  
ability  to  justify  the  item  to  themselves  as  a legitimate  use of 
their  expense account. 
A  few  more  investigations  into  expense  accounts  turned  
up  similar rationalizations. In one study,  we found  that  when  
people  give receipts to  their  administrative  assistants  to  sub­
mit,  they  are  then  one  additional  step  removed  from  the  dis­
honest  act,  and  hence  more  likely  to  slip  in  questionable  
receipts. In another  study,  we found  that  businesspeople  who  
live  in  New  York  are  more  likely to  consider  a  gift  for  their  
kid  as a business expense if they purchased  it at the San Fran­
cisco  airport  (or  someplace  else far  from  home)  than  if they 
had  purchased  it  at  the  New  York  airport,  or  on  their  way  
home from  the airport.  None of this makes logical sense, but 
when  the  medium  of exchange is nonmonetary,  our  ability to 
rationalize increases by leaps and  bounds.  
I  HAD   MY  own  experience with  dishonesty  a  few  years  ago.  
Someone broke into  my Skype account  (very cool online tele­
phone  software)  and  charged  my  PayPal  account  (an  online  
payment  system)  a few hundred  dollars  for  the service. 
I  don't  think  the  person  who  did  this  was  a   hardened   
criminal. From  a criminal's perspective, breaking into  my ac-
224 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   ii   
225 
count  would  most  likely  be  a  waste  of  time  and  talent  be­
cause if this person  was  sufficiently smart to hack into Skype, 
he could probably  have hacked  into Amazon,  Dell,  or  maybe  
even  a  credit  card  account,  and  gotten  much  more  value  for  
his time. Rather,  I imagine  that  this  person  was  a  smart  kid  
who  had  managed  to  hack  into  my  account  and  who  took  
advantage  of  this  "free"  communication  by  calling  anyone  
who  would  talk  to  him  until  I managed  to  regain  control of 
my   account.   He   may   have   even   seen   this   as   a   techie   
challenge—or  maybe  he  is  a  student  to  whom  I once  gave  a  
bad  grade  and  who  decided  to tweak  my nose for  it.  
Would  this  kid  have  taken  cash  from  my  wallet,  even  if he 
knew  for  sure that  no  one would  ever catch him? Maybe, but  I  
imagine that the answer  is no. Instead, I suspect that  there  were  
some aspects of Skype and  of how  my account was  set  up  that  
"helped" this person  engage in this activity and not  feel morally 
reprehensible: First, he  stole calling time, not  money. Next,  he  
did  not  gain  anything  tangible from  the transaction. Third,  he  
stole from Skype rather than  directly from me. Fourth, he might 
have  imagined  that  at  the  end  of the  day  Skype, not  I,  would  
cover the cost. Fifth, the cost of the calls was charged  automati­
cally  to  me  via  PayPal.  So  here  we  had  another  step  in  the  
process—and  another  level of fuzziness  in terms of who  would  
eventually  pay  for  the  calls.  (Just  in  case you  are  wondering,  I  
have since canceled this direct link to PayPal.) 
Was this person  stealing from  me? Sure, but  there  were  so  
many  things that  made  the theft  fuzzy  that  I really don't  think  
he thought  of himself  as a dishonest  guy. No  cash was  taken,  
right?  And  was  anyone  really  hurt?  This kind  of thinking  is  
worrisome. If my problem  with  Skype was  indeed  due  to  the  
nonmonetary  nature of the transactions on Skype, this  would  
mean  that  there  is  much  more  at  risk  here,  including  a  wide  

predictably   irrational   
range  of  online  services, and  perhaps  even  credit  and  debit  
cards.  All these  electronic transactions,  with  no  physical ex­
change of money from  hand  to hand,  might make it easier for 
people  to  be  dishonest—without   ever  questioning  or  fully  
acknowledging the immorality  of their actions. 
THERE'S   ANOTHER,   SINISTER  impression  that  I  took  out  of  
our  studies.  In  our  experiments, the  participants  were  smart,  
caring,  honorable  individuals,  who  for  the  most  part  had  a  
clear  limit  to  the  amount  of cheating  they  would  undertake,  
even  with  nonmonetary  currency  like the  tokens. For  almost  
all of them,  there  was  a point  at which their conscience called 
for  them  to  stop,  and  they  did.  Accordingly, the  dishonesty  
that we saw in our experiments was probably the lower  bound­
ary of human  dishonesty:  the  level of dishonesty  practiced  by  
individuals  who want to be ethical and  who want to see them­
selves as ethical—the so-called good  people.  
The  scary  thought  is that  if we  did  the  experiments  with  
nonmonetary  currencies  that  were  not  as  immediately  con­
vertible into  money  as tokens, or  with  individuals  who  cared  
less  about  their  honesty,  or  with  behavior  that  was  not  so  
publicly  observable,  we  would  most  likely  have  found  even  
higher  levels of dishonesty. In other words, the  level of decep­
tion  we  observed  here  is probably  an  underestimation  of the 
level  of deception  we  would  find  across  a  variety  of circum­
stances  and  individuals.  
Now  suppose  that  you  have  a company  or  a  division  of a 
company  led  by  a  Gordon  Gekko  character  who  declares  
that   "greed  is  good."  And  suppose  he  used   nonmonetary   
means  of  encouraging  dishonesty.  Can  you  see  how  such  a  
swashbuckler  could  change  the  mind-set  of  people  who  in  
226 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   ii   
227 
principle  want  to  be  honest  and  want  to  see  themselves  as  
honest,  but  also  want  to  hold  on  to  their  jobs  and  get  ahead  
in  the  world?  It  is  under  just  such  circumstances  that  non­
monetary  currencies  can  lead  us  astray.  They  let  us  bypass  
our  conscience and  freely explore the  benefits of dishonesty. 
This  view of human  nature  is worrisome. We can hope  to  
surround  ourselves  with  good,  moral  people,  but  we  have  to  
be realistic. Even good  people  are  not  immune  to  being  par­
tially  blinded   by  their  own  minds.  This  blindness   allows   
them  to  take  actions  that  bypass  their  own  moral  standards  
on  the  road  to  financial  rewards.  In  essence, motivation  can  
play tricks on  us whether  or not  we are good, moral  people.  
As  the  author  and  journalist  Upton  Sinclair  once  noted,  
"It  is difficult  to get a man  to understand  something when  his  
salary  depends  upon  his  not  understanding  it." We can  now  
add  the  following  thought:  it  is  even  more  difficult  to  get  a  
man  to  understand  something  when  he  is dealing  with  non­
monetary  currencies.  
THE  PROBLEMS  OF dishonesty, by the way, don't  apply just to 
individuals.  In  recent years  we  have  seen  business  in  general  
succumb  to  a  lower  standard   of  honesty.  I'm  not   talking   
about  big acts of dishonesty,  like those perpetrated  by Enron 
and  Worldcom.  I mean  the  small  acts of dishonesty  that  are  
similar  to  swiping  Cokes  out  of  the  refrigerator.  There  are  
companies out  there,  in other words, that  aren't  stealing cash 
off  our  plates,  so  to  speak,  but  are  stealing  things  one  step  
removed  from  cash.  
There are plenty of examples. Recently, one of my  friends,  
who  had  carefully  saved  up  his  frequent-flyer  miles for  a  va­
cation, went  to the  airline who  issued  all these miles. He  was  

predictably   irrational   
told  that  all  the  dates  he  wanted  were  blacked  out.  In  other  
words,  although  he had  saved  up 25,000  frequent-flyer  miles,  
he couldn't  use them  (and  he tried  many  dates). But, the  rep­
resentative said, if he wanted  to use 50,000  miles, there  might  
be  some  seats.  She  checked.  Sure,  there  were  seats  every­
where. 
To  be  sure,  there  was  probably  some  small  print  in  the  
frequently-flyer  brochure explaining that  this was OK. But to 
my  friend,  the  25,000  miles  he  had  earned  represented  a  lot  
of   money.  Let's  say  it  was  $450.  Would  this  airline  have  
mugged  him  for that  amount  of cash? Would the  airline  have  
swiped  it from  his bank  account? No. But because it was  one  
step  removed,  the  airline  stole  it from  him  in  the  form  of re­
quiring  25,000  additional  miles.  
For  another  example,  look  at  what  banks  are  doing  with  
credit  card  rates.  Consider  what  is  called  two-cycle  billing.  
There  are  several variations  of this trick, but  the  basic idea  is  
that  the  moment  you  don't  pay  your  bill in  full,  the  credit is­
suer  will  not  only  charge  a  high  interest  rate  on  new  pur­
chases, but will actually reach into the past  and charge interest 
on  past  purchases  as well. When  the  Senate banking  commit­
tee  looked into  this  recently, it heard  plenty  of testimony  that  
certainly  made  the banks  look dishonest. For instance, a  man  
in  Ohio  who  charged  $3,200  to  his card  soon  found  his  debt  
to be $10,700  because of penalties, fees,  and  interest.  
These  were  not  boiler-room  operators  charging  high  in­
terest  rates  and  fees,  but  some of the  biggest and  presumably  
most  reputable  banks  in  America—those  whose  advertising  
campaigns  would  make  you  believe  that  you  and  the  bank  
were  "family."  Would  a  family  member  steal  your  wallet?  
No.  But these  banks,  with  a transaction  somewhat  removed  
from  cash, apparently  would.  
228 

the  context  of  our  character,  part   ii   
229 
Once  you  view  dishonesty  through   this  lens,  it  is  clear  
that  you can't open  a newspaper  in the  morning  without  see­
ing new  examples to  add.  
AND   so   WE  return  to  our  original  observation:  isn't  cash  
strange? When  we  deal  with  money,  we  are  primed  to  think  
about  our  actions  as if we  had  just  signed  an  honor  code. If 
you  look  at  a  dollar  bill,  in  fact,  it  seems  to  have  been  de­
signed  to  conjure  up  a  contract:  THE  UNITED   STATES   OF   
AMERICA,  it  says in prominent  type,  with  a  shadow  beneath  
that  makes  it  seem  three-dimensional.  And  there  is  George  
Washington himself  (and we all know that  he could never tell 
a  lie). And  then,  on  the  back,  it  gets  even  more  serious: IN 
GOD  WE TRUST,  it says. And  then  we've got that  weird  pyra­
mid,  and  on  top,  that  unblinking  eye! And  it's  looking  right  
at us! In addition  to all this symbolism, the sanctity of money 
could  also  be  aided  by  the  fact  that  money  is  a  clear  unit of 
exchange. It's hard  to  say that  a dime  is not  a dime, or  a buck 
isn't  a buck. 
But  look  at  the  latitude  we  have  with  nonmonetary  ex­
changes. There's always  a  convenient rationale. We can  take  
a  pencil  from  work,  a  Coke  from  the  fridge—we  can  even  
backdate  our  stock  options—and   find  a  story  to  explain  it  
all. We can be dishonest  without  thinking  of ourselves as dis­
honest.  We can  steal  while  our  conscience is  apparently  fast  
asleep. 
How  can we fix this? We could  label each item  in the  sup­
ply  cabinet  with  a  price,  for  instance,  or  use  wording   that   
explains  stocks  and  stock  options  clearly  in  terms  of  their  
monetary  value.  But  in  the  larger  context,  we  need  to  wake  
up  to  the  connection  between  nonmonetary   currency   and   

predictably   irrational   
our  tendency  to cheat. We need  to recognize that  once cash is 
a  step  away,  we  will  cheat  by  a  factor  bigger  than  we  could  
ever imagine. We need  to  wake  up  to  this—individually   and   
as  a nation,  and  do  it  soon.  
Why?  For  one  thing,  the  days  of  cash  are  coming  to  a  
close.  Cash  is  a  drag  on  the  profits  of banks—they  want  to  
get  rid  of  it.  On  the  other  hand,  electronic  instruments   are   
very  profitable.  Profits  from  credit  cards  in  the  United  States  
rose  from  $9 billion  in  1996 to  a  record  $27 billion  in  2004.  
By  2010, banking  analysts  say,  there  will  be  $50  billion  in  
new  electronic  transactions,  nearly  twice  the  number   pro­
cessed under the Visa  and MasterCard  brands  in 2004.
23
  The  
question,  therefore,  is  how  we  can  control  our  tendency  to  
cheat  when  we  are  brought  to  our  senses only  by the  sight of 
cash—and  what  we can  do  now  that  cash  is going  away.  
Willie Sutton  allegedly  said that  he robbed  banks  because  
that's  where  the  money  was.  By that  logic  he  might  be  writ­
ing  the  fine  print  for  a  credit  card  company  today  or  pencil­
ing  in blackout  dates  for  an  airline. It might  not  be where  the  
cash is, but  it's certainly where  you  will  find  the  money.  
230 

CHAPTER      1  3  
Beer  and  Free  Lunches  
What  Is  Behavioral     Economics,     and    Where    
Are  the  Free       Lunches?       
T
he  Carolina  Brewery  is  a  hip  bar  on  Franklin  Street,  the  
main  street  outside  the  University  of North  Carolina  at  
Chapel  Hill.  A  beautiful  street  with  brick  buildings  and  old  
trees,  it has  many  restaurants,  bars,  and  coffee  shops—more  
than  one  would  expect to  find  in  a small  town.  
As  you  open  the  doors  to  the  Carolina  Brewery, you  see  
an  old  building  with  high  ceilings and  exposed  beams,  and  a  
few  large  stainless  steel  beer  containers  that  promise  a  good  
time. There are  semiprivate  tables scattered  around.  This is a 
favorite  place  for  students  as  well  as  an  older  crowd  to  enjoy  
good  beer  and  food.  
Soon  after  I joined MIT, Jonathan  Levav  (a  professor  at  
Columbia)  and  I  were  mulling  over  the  kinds  of  questions  
one  might  conjure  up  in  such  a pleasant  pub.  First, does  the  
sequential  process  of  taking  orders   (asking  each  person   in   
turn  to  state  his  or  her  order)  influence  the  choices that  the  
people  sitting  around   the  table  ultimately  make?  In  other  

predictably   irrational   
words,  are the patrons  influenced  by the selections of the  oth­
ers around  them? Second, if this is the case, does it encourage 
conformity  or  nonconformity?  In  other  words,  would   the   
patrons  sitting around  a table intentionally choose beers  that  
were different  from  or the same as the choices of those  order­
ing  before  them?  Finally, we  wanted  to  know  whether  being  
influenced  by  others'  choices  would  make  people  better  or  
worse  off, in terms  of how  much  they  enjoyed their  beer.  
THROUGHOUT  THIS  BOOK,  I have described experiments  that  
I hoped  would  be surprising  and  illuminating. If they were, it 
was  largely  because  they  refuted   the  common   assumption   
that  we  are  all  fundamentally   rational.  Time  and  again  I  
have  provided  examples  that  are  contrary  to  Shakespeare's  
depiction  of  us  in  "What  a  piece of work  is  a  man."  In  fact,  
these examples, show  that  we are not  noble in reason,  not  in­
finite  in faculty, and  rather  weak  in apprehension.  (Frankly, I 
think  Shakespeare  knew  that  very  well,  and  this  speech of 
Hamlet's  is not  without  irony.)  
In  this  final  chapter,  I will present  an  experiment  that  of­
fers  one  more  example of our  predictable  irrationality.  Then  
I  will  further  describe  the  general  economic  perspective  on  
human  behavior, contrast  it with  behavioral  economics, and 
draw  some conclusions. Let me  begin with  the  experiment.  
To   GET  TO  the  bottom  of the  sudsy  barrel  of questions  that  
we  thought  of  at  the  Carolina  Brewery, Jonathan  and  I  de­
cided to plunge  in—metaphorically, of course. We started  by  
asking  the  manager  of  the  Carolina  Brewery to  let  us  serve  
free  samples of beer to the customers—as long as we paid  for  
232 

beer  and  free   lunches   
the  beer  ourselves.  (Imagine  how  difficult  it  was,  later,  to  
convince the MIT accountants  that  a $1,400  bill for  beer is a 
legitimate  research  expense.)  The  manager  of  the  bar  was  
happy  to  comply. After  all, he  would  sell us  the  beer  and  his  
customers would  receive a free sample, which would  presum­
ably increase their  desire to return to  the  brewery.  
Handing  us  our  aprons,  he  established  his  one  and  only  
condition:  that  we  approach  the  people  and  get  their  orders  
for  samples  within  one  minute  of the  time  they  sat  down. If 
we  couldn't  make  it  in  time,  we  would  indicate  this  to  the  
regular  waiters  and  they  would  approach  the  table  and  take  
the  orders.  This  was  reasonable. The  manager  didn't  know  
how  efficient  we  could  be  as  waiters,  and  he  didn't  want  to  
delay the  service by too  much. We started  working.  
I  approached   a  group   as  soon  as  they  sat  down.  They  
seemed  to  be  undergraduate  couples  on  a  double  date.  Both  
guys were wearing  what  looked like their  best slacks, and  the  
girls  had  on  enough  makeup  to  make  Elizabeth Taylor look 
unadorned   in  comparison.  I  greeted  them,  announced   that   
the  brewery  was  offering  free  beer  samples,  and  then  pro­
ceeded to describe the  four  beers:  
(1)  Copperline  Amber Ale: A medium-bodied  red  ale with  a  
well-balanced  hop  and  malt character and  a  traditional  
ale  fruitiness.  
(2)  Franklin Street Lager: A Bohemian pilsner-style golden 
lager brewed with  a soft maltiness and  a crisp hoppy  finish.  
(3)  India  Pale Ale: A well-hopped  robust  ale originally 
brewed  to withstand  the  long ocean journey  from  En­
gland  around  the  cape of Africa  to India.  It is  dry-
hopped  with  cascade hops  for  a fragrant  floral  finish.  
(4)  Summer Wheat Ale: Bavarian-style ale, brewed  with 50 
233 

predictably   irrational   
percent  wheat  as  a light,  spritzy,  refreshing  summer  
drink.  It is gently hopped  and  has  a unique  aroma  
reminiscent of banana  and  clove from  an  authentic  
German  yeast  strain.  
Which  would  you choose? 
•    Copperline Amber Ale 
•    Franklin  Street Lager 
•    India  Pale Ale 
•    Summer Wheat Ale 
After  describing the  beers, I nodded  at  one of the  guys—  
the  blond-haired  guy—and  asked  for  his  selection; he chose 
the  India  Pale Ale. The  girl  with  the  more  elaborate  hairdo  
was next; she chose the Franklin  Street Lager. Then  I  turned  
to  the  other  girl.  She  opted  for  the  Copperline  Amber  Ale.  
Her  boyfriend,  who  was  last,  selected  the  Summer  Wheat  
Ale.  With  their  orders  in  hand,  I  rushed  to  the  bar,  where  
Bob—the  tall,  handsome   bartender,   a  senior  in  computer  
science—stood  smiling.  Aware  that  we  were  in  a  hurry,  he  
filled  my  order  before  any  of the  others.  I then  took  the  tray  
with  the  four  two-ounce  samples  back  to  the  double-daters'  
table and  placed their  beers in front  of them. 
Along  with  their  samples,  I handed  each  of them  a  short  
survey, printed  on  the  brewery's  stationery.  In this  survey  we  
asked  the  respondents  how  much  they  liked  their  beer  and  
whether  they  had  regretted  choosing  that  particular   brew.   
After  I collected their surveys, I continued to observe the  four  
people  from  a distance to  see whether  any of them  took  a  sip  
of  anyone  else's beer. As it turned  out,  none of them  shared  a  
sample. 
234 

beer  and  free  lunches  
Jonathan  and  I repeated  this  procedure  with  49 more  ta­
bles.  Then  we  continued,  but   for  the  next  50  tables  we  
changed  the procedure. This time, after  we read  the descrip­
tions of the  beers, we  handed  the  participants  a  small  menu  
with  the  names  of the  four  beers  and  asked  each of them  to  
write down their preferred  beer, rather  than  simply say it  out  
loud.  In  so  doing,  we  transformed  ordering  from  a  public  
event  into  a  private  one.  This  meant  that  each  participant  
would  not  hear  what  the  others—including,  perhaps,  some­
one they  were trying  hard  to  impress—ordered  and  so could 
not  be influenced  by it. 
What  happened?  We  found  that  when  people  order  out  
loud  in sequence, they choose differently  from  when  they  or­
der  in  private.  When  ordering  sequentially  (publicly), they 
order  more types of beer per table—in essence opting  for va­
riety. A basic way to understand  this is by thinking  about  the  
Summer  Wheat  Ale.  This  brew  was  not  very  attractive  to  
most  people.  But  when  the  other  beers  were  "taken,"  our  
participants felt that they had to choose something different— 
perhaps  to  show  that  they  had   a  mind  of  their  own   and   
weren't trying to copy the others—and  so they chose a  differ­
ent beer, one that  they may not have initially wanted,  but  one  
that  conveyed their  individuality.  
What  about  their  enjoyment of the  beer? It  stands  to  rea­
son that  if people choose beer that  nobody has chosen just to 
convey  uniqueness,  they  will  probably  end  up  with  a  beer  
that  they  don't  really  want  or  like.  And  indeed  this  was  the  
case.  Overall, those  who  made  their  choices out  loud,  in  the  
standard  way that  food  is ordered  at restaurants,  were not  as  
happy  with  their  selections as those  who  made  their choices 
privately, without  taking others' opinions into consideration. 
There  was,  however,  one  very important  exception: the  first  
235 

predictably   irrational   
person  to  order  beer  in  the  group  that  made  its decisions  out  
loud  was  de  facto  in  the  same  condition  as  the  people  who  
expressed  their  opinion  privately,  since  he  or  she  was  unen­
cumbered,  in  choosing,  by  other  people's  choices. Accord­
ingly,  we  found   that  the  first  person  to  order  beer  in  the  
sequential group  was the happiest  of his or her group  and  just  
as happy  as those who  chose their  beers in  private.  
BY  THE  WAY,  a  funny  thing  happened  when  we ran  the experi­
ment  in  the  Carolina  Brewery: Dressed  in  my  waiter's  outfit,  I  
approached  one of the tables and  began to  read  the  menu  to  the  
couple there. Suddenly, I realized that the man  was Rich, a grad­
uate  student  in  computer  science, someone  with  whom  I  had  
worked on a project related to computational vision three or four 
years earlier. Because the experiment had to be conducted  in the 
same way each time, this was not a good time for me to chat with 
him,  so I put  on  a poker  face  and  launched  into  a  matter-of-fact  
description  of the  beers. After  I finished,  I nodded  to  Rich  and  
asked, "What can I get you?" Instead of giving me his order, he 
asked how  I was  doing.  
"Very  well, thank  you,"  I said.  "Which of the  beers can  I  
get you ? " 
He  and  his companion  both  selected beers, and  then  Rich  
took  another  stab  at  conversation:  "Dan,  did  you  ever  finish  
your PhD?" 
"Yes,"  I  said,  "I  finished  about  a  year  ago.  Excuse me;  I  
will  be right  back with  your  beers." As I walked  to the bar  to  
fill  their  order,  I  realized  that  Rich  must  have  thought  that  
this  was  my  profession  and  that  a  degree  in  social science 
would  only  get  someone  a  job  as  a  beer  server.  When  I  got  
back to the table with the samples, Rich and his companion— 
236 

beer  and  free   lunches   
who  was  his  wife—tasted  the  beers  and  answered  the  short  
questionnaire. Then Rich tried  again. He told me that  he  had  
recently  read  one  of  my  papers  and  liked  it  a  lot.  It  was  a  
good  paper,  and  I liked  it, too, but  I think  he  was  just  trying  
to make  me  feel  better  about  my job as  a beer  server.  
ANOTHER  STUDY,  CONDUCTED later at Duke with  wine  sam­
ples  and  MBA students,  allowed  us  to  measure  some  of  the  
participants'  personality  traits—something  the  manager  of  
the  Carolina  Brewery  had   not   been  thrilled   about.   That   
opened  the  door  for  us  to  find  out  what  might  be  contribut­
ing  to  this  interesting  phenomenon.  What  we  found  was  a  
correlation  between  the  tendency  to  order  alcoholic  bever­
ages that  were  different  from  what  other  people  at  the  table  
had  chosen  and  a  personality  trait  called  "need  for  unique­
ness."  In  essence, individuals  more  concerned  with  portray­
ing  their   own   uniqueness   were   more   likely  to   select   an   
alcoholic  beverage  not  yet  ordered  at  their  table  in  an  effort  
to demonstrate  that  they  were  in  fact  one of a  kind.  
What these results show is that people are sometimes willing 
to  sacrifice the pleasure  they get from  a particular  consumption  
experience  in  order  to  project  a certain  image to  others.  When  
people  order  food  and  drinks,  they  seem to  have two  goals: to 
order  what  they  will enjoy most  and  to portray  themselves in  a  
positive  light  in  the  eyes of  their  friends.  The  problem  is  that  
once  they  order,  say, the  food,  they  may  be  stuck  with  a  dish  
they don't like—a situation they often regret. In essence, people, 
particularly those with a high need for uniqueness, may  sacrifice  
personal  utility in order to gain reputational  utility.  
Although  these  results  were  clear,  we  suspected  that  in  
other   cultures—where    the   need   for   uniqueness    is   not   
237 

predictably   irrational   
considered   a  positive  trait—people   who  ordered   aloud   in   
public would  try  to portray  a sense of belonging to the  group  
and  express  more  conformity  in  their  choices.  In  a  study  we  
conducted  in Hong  Kong, we found  that  this  was  indeed  the  
case.  In Hong  Kong, individuals  also  selected food  that  they  
did  not  like  as  much  when  they  selected  it  in  public  rather  
than  in private,  but  these participants  were  more  likely to se­
lect the same item as the people ordering  before  them—again  
making  a regrettable mistake, though  a different  type of mis­
take, when  ordering  food.  
FROM  WHAT I have told you  so far  about  this experiment,  you  
can  see that  a  bit of simple  life  advice—a  free  lunch—comes  
out  of this  research. First, when  you  go to  a restaurant,  it's a 
good  idea  to  plan  your  order  before  the  waiter  approaches  
you,  and   stick  to  it.  Being  swayed   by  what  other   people   
choose might  lead you to choose a worse alternative. If you're 
afraid  that  you  might  be  swayed  anyway,  a  useful  strategy  is  
to  announce  your  order  to  the  table  before the  waiter comes. 
This  way, you  have  staked  a claim to your  order,  and  it's less 
likely  that  the  other  people  around  the  table  will  think  you  
are not  unique,  even if someone else orders  the  same dish  be­
fore  you  get  your  chance. But of course  the  best  option  is to 
order  first.  
Perhaps  restaurant  owners  should  ask  their  customers  to  
write  out  orders  privately  (or  quietly  give their  orders  to  the  
waiters), so that  no customer will be influenced  by the  orders  
of  his or her companions. We pay  a lot of money  for the plea­
sure  of  dining  out.  Getting  people  to  order  anonymously  is  
most  likely the  cheapest  and  simplest  way  to  increase the  en­
joyment  derived  from  these experiences. 
238 

beer  and  free   lunches   
But  there's  a  bigger lesson that  I would  like to  draw  from  
this  experiment—and  in  fact  from  all that  I have  said  in  the  
preceding chapters. Standard  economics assumes that  we  are  
rational—that  we  know  all  the  pertinent  information  about  
our  decisions, that  we can calculate the  value of the  different  
options  we  face,  and  that  we  are  cognitively  unhindered   in   
weighing the  ramifications of each potential  choice.  
The result is that  we are presumed  to be making logical and 
sensible decisions. And  even if we make  a wrong decision  from  
time to time, the standard  economics perspective suggests  that  
we will quickly learn  from  our  mistakes either  on  our  own  or  
with the help of "market forces." On the basis of these  assump­
tions,  economists draw  far-reaching  conclusions about  every­
thing from  shopping  trends  to law to public policy. 
But,  as  the  results  presented   in  this  book   (and  others)  
show, we are all far  less rational  in our  decision making  than  
standard  economic theory  assumes. Our  irrational  behaviors  
are  neither  random  nor  senseless—they  are  systematic  and  
predictable. We all make the same types of mistakes over  and  
over, because of the basic wiring of our  brains. So wouldn't  it  
make  sense  to  modify  standard  economics  and  move  away  
from  naive  psychology, which  often  fails  the  tests  of  reason,  
introspection, and—most  important—empirical  scrutiny?  
Wouldn't economics make a lot more sense if it were based 
on  how  people  actually  behave,  instead  of how  they  should  
behave?  As  I said  in  the  Introduction,  that  simple  idea  is  the  
basis of behavioral  economics, an  emerging  field  focused  on  
the  (quite  intuitive)  idea  that  people  do  not  always  behave  
rationally  and  that  they  often  make  mistakes  in  their  deci­
sions. 
In many  ways, the standard  economic and  Shakespearean  
views  are  more  optimistic  about  human  nature,  since  they  
239 

predictably   irrational   
assume  that  our  capacity  for  reasoning  is  limitless.  By  the  
same  token  the  behavioral  economics view,  which  acknowl­
edges human  deficiencies, is more depressing,  because it dem­
onstrates  the  many  ways  in which  we fall  short  of our  ideals.  
Indeed,  it can  be rather  depressing  to  realize that  we  all con­
tinually  make  irrational  decisions  in  our  personal,  profes­
sional,  and  social  lives. But  there  is  a  silver  lining:  the  fact  
that  we make  mistakes also means  that  there  are  ways to  im­
prove  our  decisions—and  therefore  that  there  are  opportuni­
ties for  "free  lunches."  
ONE   OF  THE  main  differences  between  standard  and  behav­
ioral  economics involves  this  concept  of  "free  lunches." Ac­
cording to the assumptions  of standard  economics, all  human  
decisions  are  rational  and  informed,  motivated  by  an  accu­
rate  concept  of  the  worth  of  all  goods  and  services  and  the  
amount  of happiness  (utility)  all  decisions  are  likely to  pro­
duce.  Under  this  set of assumptions,  everyone  in  the  market­
place is trying to maximize profit  and  striving to optimize his 
experiences.  As  a consequence, economic theory  asserts  that  
there  are  no  free  lunches—if there  were  any, someone  would  
have already  found  them  and  extracted  all their  value.  
Behavioral economists, on the other hand,  believe that  peo­
ple  are  susceptible to  irrelevant  influences  from  their  immedi­
ate  environment   (which  we  call  context  effects),   irrelevant   
emotions,  shortsightedness,  and  other  forms  of  irrationality  
(see  any  chapter  in  this  book  or  any  research  paper  in  behav­
ioral economics for  more examples). What  good  news  can ac­
company this realization? The good news is that these mistakes 
also  provide  opportunities  for  improvement.  If  we  all  make  
systematic  mistakes  in  our  decisions,  then  why  not  develop  
240 

beer  and  free   lunches   
new strategies, tools, and  methods  to help us make better deci­
sions  and  improve  our  overall  well-being? That's  exactly  the  
meaning  of  free  lunches  from  the  perspective  of  behavioral  
economics—the  idea  that  there  are  tools, methods,  and  poli­
cies that  can  help  all of us make better  decisions and  as a con­
sequence achieve what  we desire. 
For  example, the  question  why  Americans  are  not  saving  
enough  for  retirement  is meaningless from  the perspective of 
standard   economics. If  we  are  all  making  good,  informed  
decisions  in  every aspect of our  lives, then  we are  also  saving  
the  exact  amount  that  we  want  to  save. We  might  not  save  
much  because we don't  care about  the  future,  because we  are  
looking  forward  to  experiencing  poverty  at  retirement,  be­
cause we expect our kids to take care of us, or because we  are  
hoping  to  win  the  lottery—there  are  many  possible reasons. 
The  main  point  is that  from  the  standard  economic perspec­
tive,  we  are  saving  exactly  the  right  amount  in  accordance  
with  our  preferences.  
But  from  the  perspective  of behavioral  economics, which 
does not  assume that  people are rational, the idea that  we  are  
not  saving enough  is perfectly reasonable. In fact,  research  in  
behavioral  economics points  to  many  possible  reasons  why  
people  are  not  saving enough  for  retirement.  People procras­
tinate. People have a hard  time understanding  the real cost of 
not  saving  as  well  as  the  benefits  of  saving.  (By how  much  
would  your  life  be better  in  the  future  if you  were  to  deposit  
an  additional  $1,000  in your retirement  account every  month  
for  the  next  20 years?)  Being  "house  rich"  helps  people  be­
lieve  that  they  are  indeed  rich.  It  is  easy  to  create  consump­
tion  habits  and  hard  to  give  them  up.  And  there  are  many,  
many  more  reasons.  
The  potential  for  free  lunches  from  the  perspective  of  
241 

predictably   irrational   
behavioral  economics  lies  in  new  methods,  mechanisms,  
and   other   interventions   that   would   help   people   achieve   
more of what  they truly  want. For example, the new  and  in­
novative  credit  card  that  I  described  in  Chapter  6,  on  self-
control,  could  help  people  exercise more  self-control  within  
the  domain  of spending.  Another  example of this  approach  
is  a  mechanism  called  "save  more  tomorrow,"  which  Dick  
Thaler   and   Shlomo  Benartzi  proposed   and   tested   a  few  
years  ago.  
Here's how  "save more tomorrow"  works. When new  em­
ployees  join  a  company,  in  addition  to  the  regular  decisions  
they  are  asked  to  make  about  what  percentage  of their  pay­
check  to  invest  in  their  company's  retirement  plan,  they  are  
also  asked  what  percentage  of their  future  salary  raises  they  
would  be  willing  to  invest  in  the  retirement  plan.  It  is  diffi­
cult  to  sacrifice  consumption  today  for  saving  in  the  distant  
future,  but  it  is psychologically easier  to  sacrifice  consump­
tion  in the future,  and  even easier to  give up  a percentage of a 
salary  increase that  one does not  yet  have.  
When  the  plan  was  implemented  in Thaler and Benartzi's 
test,  the  employees joined and  agreed  to  have their  contribu­
tion,  as  a percentage, increase with  their  future  salary raises. 
What  was  the  outcome? Over  the  next  few  years, as the  em­
ployees received raises, the  saving rates  increased from  about  
3.5  percent  to  around  13.5 percent—a  gain  for  the  employ­
ees, their families, and  the company, which  by now  had  more  
satisfied  and  less worried  employees.  
This  is the  basic idea  of free  lunches—providing  benefits  
for  all the parties  involved. Note that these free lunches don't 
have to  be without  cost  (implementing the  self-control credit 
card  or  "save more tomorrow"  inevitably involves a cost).  As  
long  as  these  mechanisms  provide  more  benefits  than  costs,  
242 

beer  and  free   lunches   
we  should  consider  them  to  be  free  lunches—mechanisms  
that  provide  net  benefits to  all parties. 
IF  I  WERE  to  distill  one  main  lesson  from  the  research  de­
scribed  in this  book, it is that  we are pawns  in  a game  whose  
forces  we  largely  fail  to  comprehend.  We  usually  think  of  
ourselves  as  sitting  in  the  driver's  seat, with  ultimate  control  
over  the  decisions  we  make  and  the  direction  our  life  takes;  
but,  alas, this  perception  has  more  to  do  with  our  desires—  
with  how  we want  to  view ourselves—than  with  reality.  
Each  of the  chapters  in  this  book  describes  a  force  (emo­
tions, relativity, social norms, etc.) that  influences our  behav­
ior. And  while  these  influences  exert  a  lot of power  over  our  
behavior,  our  natural  tendency  is to  vastly  underestimate  or  
completely ignore this power. These influences have an  effect  
on  us  not  because  we  lack  knowledge,  lack  practice,  or  are  
weak-minded.   On  the  contrary,  they  repeatedly  affect  ex­
perts  as  well  as  novices  in  systematic  and  predictable  ways.  
The resulting  mistakes are simply how  we go about  our lives, 
how  we  "do  business." They are  a part of us. 
Visual  illusions  are  also  illustrative  here. Just  as  we  can't  
help  being fooled  by visual  illusions, we  fall  for  the  "decision  
illusions" our  minds  show  us. The point  is that  our  visual  and  
decision  environments  are  filtered  to  us  courtesy  of our  eyes,  
our  ears,  our  senses of smell  and  touch,  and  the  master  of it 
all,  our  brain.  By the  time  we  comprehend  and  digest  infor­
mation, it is not necessarily a true reflection of reality. Instead, 
it is our  representation  of reality, and  this  is the input we base 
our  decisions on. In essence we are limited to the tools  nature  
has  given us, and  the natural  way  in which  we make decisions 
is limited  by the  quality  and  accuracy of these tools. 
243 

predictably  irrational  
THANK  YOU  FOR  reading  this  book.  I hope  you  have  gained  
some interesting insights about human  behavior, gained some 
insight  into  what  really  makes  us  tick,  and  discovered  ways  
to improve your  decision making.  I also hope that  I have been 
able to  share  with  you  my  enthusiasm  for  the  study  of ratio­
nality  and  irrationality.  In  my  opinion,  studying  human  be­
havior  is a fantastic  gift  because it helps  us better  understand  
ourselves and  the daily mysteries we encounter. Although  the  
topic is important  and  fascinating,  it is not easy to  study,  and  
there  is still  a lot of work  ahead  of us.  As the  Nobel  laureate  
Murray   Gell-Mann  once  said,  "Think  how   hard   physics   
would  be if particles could  think."  
Irrationally        yours,        
Dan    Ariely    
PS:  If  you  want  to  participate  in  this  journey,  log  on  to  
www.predictablyirrational.com,   sign  up   for   a  few  of  our  
studies,  and  leave us your  ideas and  thoughts.  
244 
A second main  lesson is that  although  irrationality  is com­
monplace,  it  does  not  necessarily mean  that  we  are  helpless.  
Once  we  understand  when  and  where  we  may  make  errone­
ous decisions, we can try  to  be more vigilant, force ourselves 
to  think  differently  about  these  decisions, or  use technology 
to  overcome  our  inherent  shortcomings.  This  is  also  where  
businesses and  policy makers  could  revise their thinking  and  
consider  how  to  design  their  policies  and  products  so  as  to  
provide  free  lunches.  

Thanks 
O
ver the  years  I have  been  fortunate  to  work  on  joint  re­
search projects with  smart,  creative, generous  individu­
als. The research described  in this book is largely an  outcome  
of  their  ingenuity  and  insight. These individuals  are not  only  
great  researchers,  but  also  close  friends.  They  made  this  re­
search  possible.  Any  mistakes  and  omissions  in  this  book  
are  mine.  (Short biographies  of these  wonderful   researchers   
follow.)  In addition  to those with  whom  I have collaborated, I 
also want  to  thank  my  psychology  and  economics colleagues 
at  large.  Each  idea  I  ever  had,  and  every  paper  I  ever  wrote,  
was  influenced  either  explicitly or  implicitly  by  their  writing,  
ideas,  and  creativity.  Science  advances  mainly  through   a  se­
ries of small  steps  based  on  past  research,  and  I am  fortunate  
to  be able to take  my own  small  steps forward  from  the  foun­
dation  laid down  by these remarkable  researchers. At the  end  
of  this  book,  I  have  included  some  references  for  other  aca­
demic  papers  related  to  each  of  the  chapters.  These  should  

thanks 
give  the  avid  reader   an  enhanced  perspective  on,  and  the  
background  and  scope of, each topic.  (But of course this  isn't  
a  complete list.) 
Much  of the  research  described  in  this  book  was  carried  
out  while  I  was  at  MIT, and  many  of  the  participants  and  
research  assistants  were  MIT  students.  The  results  of  the  
experiments  highlight  their  (as well  as  our  own)  irrationali­
ties,  and  sometimes  poke  fun  at  them,  but  this  should  not  be  
confused  with  a  lack of caring or  a  lack of admiration.  These  
students are extraordinary  in their motivation, love of learning, 
curiosity,  and  generous  spirit.  It  has  been  a  privilege  to  get  
to  know  you  all—you  even  made  Boston's  winters   worth­
while! 
Figuring  out  how  to  write  in  "non-academese"  was  not  
easy,  but   I  got  a  lot  of  help  along  the  way.  My  deepest  
thanks  to Jim Levine, Lindsay Edgecombe, Elizabeth Fisher, 
and  the  incredible  team  at  the  Levine  Greenberg  Literary  
Agency.  I  am  also  indebted  to  Sandy  Blakeslee  for  her  in­
sightful  advice; and  to Jim Bettman, Rebecca  Waber, Ania 
Jakubek,   Carlie   Burck,   Bronwyn   Fryer,   Devra   Nelson,   
Janelle  Stanley,  Michal  Strahilevitz,  Ellen  Hoffman,   and   
Megan  Hogerty  for  their  role  in  helping  me  translate  some  
of   these  ideas  into  words.   Special  thanks   to  my   writing   
partner,  Erik  Calonius,  who  contributed  many  of  the  real-
world  examples  found  in  these  pages,  in  a  style that  helped  
me  tell this  story  as  well  as  it  could  be  told.  Special  thanks  
also  go  to  my  trusting,  supporting,  and  helpful   editor  at  
HarperCollins,  Claire Wachtel. 
I wrote  the  book  while visiting the  Institute  for  Advanced  
Study  at  Princeton.  I  cannot  imagine  a  more  ideal  environ­
ment  in  which  to  think  and  write.  I  even  got  to  spend  some  
246 

thanks 
time  in  the  institute's  kitchen,  learning  to  chop, bake,  sauté,  
and  cook  under  the  supervision  of  chefs  Michel  Reymond  
and  Yann Blanchet—I couldn't  have  asked  for  a  better  place  
to expand  my  horizons.  
Finally, thanks  to  my  lovely wife,  Sumi, who  has  listened  
to  my research  stories over  and  over  and  over  and  over.  And  
while  I hope  you  agree  that  they  are  somewhat  amusing  for  
the  first  few reads, her patience and  willingness to  repeatedly  
lend  me  her  ear  merits  sainthood.  Sumi,  tonight  I  will  be  
home  at  seven-fifteen   at  the  latest;  make  it  eight  o'clock,  
maybe eight-thirty;  I promise. 
247 



List  of Collaborators 
On  Amir  
On  joined MIT  as  a  PhD  student   a  year  after  me  and  be­
came  "my"  first  student.  As  my  first  student,  On  had  a  tre­
mendous  role  in  shaping  what  I  expect  from  students   and   
how  I  see  the  professor-student  relationship.  In  addition  to  
being  exceptionally smart,  On  has  an  amazing  set  of skills, 
and  what  he  does  not  know  he  is able to  learn  within  a  day  
or  two.  It  is  always  exciting  to  work  and  spend  time  with  
him. On  is currently  a professor  at the University of Califor­
nia  at  San Diego. 
Marco  Bertini  
When  I  first  met  Marco, he  was  a  PhD  student  at  Harvard  
Business  School,  and  unlike  his  fellow  students  he  did  not  
see  the  Charles  River  as  an  obstacle  he  should  not  cross.  
Marco  is Italian,  with  a  temperament  and  sense  of  style  to  

list  of   collaborators   
250 
match—an  overall  great  guy  you  just  want  to  go  out  for  a  
drink  with.  Marco  is currently  a  professor  at  London  Busi­
ness  School.  
Ziv  Carmon  
Ziv  was  one  of  the  main  reasons  I  joined  Duke's  PhD  pro­
gram,  and  the  years  we  spent  together  at  Duke  justified  this  
decision.  Not  only  did  I  learn  from  him  a  great  deal  about  
decision  making  and  how  to  conduct  research;  he  also  be­
came  one  of  my  dear  friends,  and  the  advice  I got  from  him  
over  the  years  has  repeatedly  proved  to  be  invaluable.  Ziv  is  
currently  a professor  at INSEAD's  Singapore  campus.  
Shane  Frederick  
I  met  Shane while  I was  a student  at  Duke  and  he  was  a  stu­
dent at Carnegie Mellon. We had  a long discussion  about  fish  
over  sushi,  and  this  has  imprinted  on  me  a  lasting  love  for  
both.  A few  years  later  Shane and  I both  moved  to MIT  and  
had  many  more  opportunities  for  sushi  and  lengthy  discus­
sions,  including  the  central  question  of  life:  "If a  bat  and  a  
ball  cost $1.10  in  total,  and  the  bat  costs  a dollar  more  than  
the  ball, how  much  does  the  ball  cost?"  Shane  is currently  a  
professor  at MIT. 
James Heyman 
James  and  I spent  a year together  at Berkeley. He would  often  
come  in  to  discuss  some  idea,  bringing  with  him  some of his 
recent baking outputs, and  this was always a good start  for  an  
interesting  discussion. Following his  life's  maxim  that  money  
isn't  everything,  his  research  focuses  on  nonfinancial  aspects  
of  marketplace  transactions.  One  of James's  passions  is  the  
many  ways  behavioral  economics  could  play  out  in  policy  

list  of   collaborators   
251 
decisions, and  over the years  I have come to  see the wisdom  in  
this  approach.  James is currently  a professor  at the  University  
of  St. Thomas  (in Minnesota, not  the Virgin Islands). 
Leonard Lee 
Leonard  joined  the  PhD  program  at MIT  to  work  on  topics  
related  to  e-commerce.  Since  we  both  kept  long  hours,   we   
started  taking  breaks  together  late  at night,  and  this  gave  us  a  
chance to start  working  jointly on  a few research projects. The 
collaboration  with  Leonard  has  been  great.  He  has  endless  
energy and  enthusiasm,  and  the number  of experiments  he can 
carry  out  during  an  average  week  is  about  what  other  people  
do  in  a  semester.  In  addition,  he  is one  of the  nicest  people  I  
have  ever  met  and  always  a  delight  to  chat  and  work   with.   
Leonard  is currently  a professor  at Columbia  University.  
Jonathan  Levav  
Jonathan  loves his mother  like no one else I have met, and  his  
main  regret  in  life  is that  he disappointed  her  when  he  didn't  
go  to  medical  school. Jonathan  is  smart,  funny,  and  an  in­
credibly  social animal,  able to  make  new  friends  in  fractions  
of  seconds. He  is physically big with  a large head,  large  teeth,  
and  an  even larger  heart. Jonathan  is currently  a professor  at  
Columbia  University.  
George Loewenstein 
George  is one  of my  first,  favorite,  and  longest-time  collabo­
rators.  He  is  also  my  role  model.  In  my  mind  George  is  the  
most  creative and  broadest  researcher  in  behavioral  econom­
ics.  George  has  an  incredible  ability  to  observe  the   world   
around  him  and  find  nuances  of behavior  that  are  important  
for  our  understanding of human  nature  as well  as  for  policy.  

list  of  collaborators  
252 
George  is currently,  and  appropriately,  the Herbert  A. Simon 
Professor  of Economics and  Psychology at  Carnegie Mellon 
University. 
Nina  Mazar  
Nina  first came to MIT for  a few  days to  get feedback  on  her  
research and  ended  up  staying for  five years. During this time 
we had  oodles of fun  working  together  and  I came to  greatly  
rely  on  her.  Nina  is  oblivious  of  obstacles, and  her  willing­
ness to take  on  large challenges led  us to carry out  some  par­
ticularly  difficult  experiments  in  rural  India. For many  years  
I  hoped  that  she  would  never  decide  to  leave;  but,  alas,  at  
some point  the  time came: she  is currently  a professor  at  the  
University  of  Toronto.  In  an  alternative  reality,  Nina   is  a  
high-fashion  designer  in Milan, Italy. 
Elie Ofek 
Elie  is  an  electrical engineer  by  training  who  then  saw  the  
light  (or so he  believes) and  switched  to  marketing.  Not  sur­
prisingly,  his  main  area  of  research  and  teaching  is  innova­
tions  and  high-tech  industries.  Elie  is  a  great  guy  to  have  
coffee  with  because  he  has  interesting  insights  and  perspec­
tives on  every topic. Currently,  Elie  is a professor  at  Harvard  
Business  School  (or  as  its  members  call  it,  "The  Haaarvard  
Business  School").  
Yesim Orhun 
Yesim  is a true  delight  in  every  way. She is funny,  smart,  and  
sarcastic.  Regrettably,  we  had  only  one  year  to  hang   out   
while  we  were  both  at  Berkeley.  Yesim's research  takes  find­
ings   from   behavioral   economics  and,   using   this   starting   
point,  provides  prescriptions  for  firms  and  policy  makers.  

list  of   collaborators   
253 
For  some  odd  reason,  what  really  gets  her  going  is  any  re­
search question  that  includes the  words  simultaneity     and  en-
dogeneity.     Yesim  is currently  a professor  at  the  University of 
Chicago. 
Drazen  Prelec  
Drazen  is  one  of  the  smartest  people  I  have  ever  met  and  
one of the  main  reasons  I joined MIT. I think  of Drazen  as  
academic  royalty:  he  knows  what  he  is  doing,  he  is  sure of 
himself,  and  everything  he touches turns to gold.  I was  hop­
ing that  by osmosis, I would  get some of his style and  depth,  
but  having  my  office  next  to  his  was  not  sufficient  for  this.  
Drazen  is currently  a professor  at MIT. 
Kristina  Shampanier  
Kristina  came to MIT to be trained  as an  economist, and  for  
some  odd  but  wonderful   reason  elected  to  work  with  me.  
Kristina  is exceptionally smart,  and  I learned  a  lot  from  her  
over  the  years.  As  a  tribute  to  her  wisdom,  when  she  gradu­
ated  from  MIT, she opted  for  a nonacademic job: she  is now 
a high-powered  consultant  in Boston. 
Jiwoong  Shin  
Jiwoong is a yin  and  yang researcher. On  one hand  he carries 
out research  in standard  economics assuming that  individuals  
are  perfectly  rational;  on  the  other  hand  he  carries  out  re­
search  in  behavioral  economics showing  that  people  are  irra­
tional.   He   is   thoughtful    and   reflective—a   philosophical   
type—and   this  duality  does  not  faze  him.  Jiwoong  and  I  
started  working  together  mostly  because  we  wanted  to  have  
fun  together,  and  indeed  we  have  spent  many  exciting  hours  

list  of   collaborators   
254 
working  together.  Jiwoong  is  currently  a  professor  at  Yale  
University. 
Baba  Shiv  
Baba  and  I  first  met  when  we  were  both  PhD  students  at  
Duke. Over the years Baba has carried out fascinating research 
in  many  areas  of decision making,  particularly  on  how  emo­
tions  influence  decision  making.  He  is  terrific  in  every  way  
and  the  kind  of  person  who  makes  everything  around  him  
seem  magically better.  Baba  is currently  a  professor  at  Stan­
ford  University.  
Rebecca  Waber  
Rebecca  is  one  of  the  most  energetic  and  happiest  people  I  
have  ever  met.  She is also the  only  person  I ever  observed  to  
burst  out laughing  while reading  her marriage vows. Rebecca 
is particularly  interested  in  research  on  decision  making  ap­
plied  to  medical  decisions, and  I count  myself  as  very  lucky  
that  she  chose  to  work  with  me  on  these  topics.  Rebecca  is  
currently   a  graduate  student  at  the  Media  Laboratory  at  
MIT. 
Klaus  Wertenbroch  
Klaus and  I met when  he was  a professor  at Duke and  I was a 
PhD  student.  Klaus's  interest  in  decision  making  is  mostly  
based  on  his  attempts  to  make  sense  of  his  own   deviation   
from  rationality,  whether  it  is  his  smoking  habit  or  his  pro­
crastination  in  delaying  work  for  the  pleasure  of  watching  
soccer  on  television.  It  was  only  fitting  that  we  worked  to­
gether  on  procrastination.  Klaus  is  currently  a  professor  at  
INSEAD. 

Notes 
1.   Jodi Kantor,  "Entrees Reach $40," New   York   Times   (Oc­
tober 21,2006). 
2.   Itamar  Simonson, "Get  Closer to Your Customers  by  Un­
derstanding How  They Make Choices," California      Man­
agement    Review    (1993).    
3.    Louis  Uchitelle,  "Lure  of  Great  Wealth  Affects  Career  
Choices,"  New   York   Times   (November  27, 2006). 
4.    Katie  Hafner,   "In  the  Web  World,  Rich  Now  Envy  the  
Superrich,"  New   York   Times   (November  21, 2006). 
5.    Valerie  Ulene,  "Car  Keys?  Not  So  Fast,"  Los      Angeles      
Times   (January  8, 2007). 
6.   John   Leland,   "Debtors   Search  for   Discipline  through  
Blogs,"  New   York   Times   (February  18, 2007). 
7.    Colin  Schieman, "The History  of Placebo Surgery,"  Uni­
versity  of Calgary  (March 2001). 
8.   Margaret  Talbot, "The Placebo Prescription,"  New     York     
Times   (June 9, 2000). 

notes 
9.  Sarah Bakewell, "Cooking with Mummy,"  Fortean       Times       
(July  1999).  
10.  D. J. Swank,  S. C.  G  Swank-Bordewijk, W. C. J. Hop,  et  
al.,  "Laparoscopic  Adhesiolysis  in  Patients  with  Chronic  
Abdominal   Pain:   A   Blinded   Randomised    Controlled    
Multi-Center  Trial," Lancet    (April  12, 2003). 
11.  "Off-Label  Use  of  Prescription  Drugs  Should  Be  Regu­
lated  by the FDA," Harvard Law School, Legal Electronic 
Archive  (December  11,  2006).  
12.  Irving  Kirsch,  "Antidepressants   Proven   to  Work   Only   
Slightly Better Than  Placebo," Prevention     and       Treatment       
(June  1998).  
13.  Sheryl  Stolberg,  "Sham  Surgery  Returns  as  a  Research  
Tool,"  New   York    Times    (April 25, 1999). 
14.  Margaret  E.  O'Kane,  National  Committee  for   Quality   
Assurance,  letter to the  editor,  USA  Today    (December 11, 
2006). 
15.  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation,   Crime     in  the      United      
States      2004—Uniform            Crime      Reports       (Washington,       
D.C.:  U.S. Government  Printing  Office,  2005).  
16.  Brody  Mullins,  "No  Free  Lunch:  New  Ethics  Rules Vex 
Capitol  Hill,"  Wall   Street    Journal    (January 29, 2007). 
17.  "Pessimism  for  the  Future,"  California     Bar  Journal    (No­
vember  1994).  
18.  Maryland  Judicial Task Force on  Professionalism  (Novem­
ber  10, 2003):     http://www.courts.state.md.us/publications/     
professionalism2003.pdf. 
19.  Florida  Bar/Josephson  Institute  Study  (1993).  
20.  DP A   Correlator,     Vol. 9, No.  3  (September  9, 2002).  See  
also Steve Sonnenberg, "The Decline in  Professionalism—  
A  Threat  to  the  Future  of  the  American  Association  of  
Petroleum  Geologists,"  Explorer     (May  2004).  
256 

notes 
21. Jan  Crosthwaite,  "Moral  Expertise:  A  Problem  in   the   
Professional  Ethics  of  Professional  Ethicists,"      Bioethics,      
Vol.9  (1995):  361-379.  
22. The 2002  Transparency  International  Corruption  Percep­
tions Index,  transparency.org.  
23. McKinsey and  Company,  "Payments:  Charting  a  Course  
to  Profits"  (December 2005). 
257 



Bibliography  and  
Additional  Readings  
Below is a list of the papers on which  the chapters  were  based,  
plus suggestions  for  additional  readings  on  each topic. 
Introduction 
RELATED  READINGS  
Daniel  Kahneman,  Barbara  L.  Fredrickson,  Charles  A.  
Schreiber,  and  Donald  A.  Redelmeier,  "When  More  Pain  Is  
Preferred  to Less: Adding a Better End," Psychological        Science        
(1993). 
Donald  A.  Redelmeier  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  "Patient's  
Memories  of  Painful  Medical  Treatments—Real-Time  and  
Retrospective Evaluations of Two Minimally  Invasive Proce­
dures,"  Pain   (1996).   
Dan Ariely, "Combining Experiences over Time: The  Effects  
of  Duration,  Intensity  Changes,  and  On-Line  Measurements  
on Retrospective Pain Evaluations," Journal    of  Behavioral      Deci­
sion  Making    (1998).    

bibliography   and  additional    readings    
Dan  Ariely  and  Ziv  Carmon,  "Gestalt  Characteristics of 
Experienced  Profiles," Journal    of  Behavioral      Decision       Mak­
ing   (2000).   
Chapter  1: The Truth  about  Relativity  
RELATED  READINGS  
Amos   Tversky,  "Features   of  Similarity,"       Psychological       
Review,    Vol. 84  (1977).  
Amos  Tversky  and  Daniel  Kahneman,  "The Framing of 
Decisions  and  the  Psychology of Choice," Science     (1981).     
Joel  Huber,  John  Payne,  and  Chris  Puto,  "Adding  Asym­
metrically  Dominated  Alternatives:  Violations  of  Regularity  
and   the  Similarity  Hypothesis,"   Journal     of   Consumer      Re­
search    (1982).    
Itamar  Simonson,  "Choice Based  on  Reasons: The  Case  
of  Attraction   and   Compromise   Effects,"   Journal     of     Con­
sumer    Research     (1989).     
Amos Tversky and Itamar Simonson,  "Context-Dependent  
Preferences,"  Management        Science     (1993).     
Dan  Ariely and  Tom Wallsten, "Seeking Subjective Domi­
nance  in  Multidimensional   Space:  An  Explanation  of  the  
Asymmetric  Dominance  Effect,"   Organizational             Behavior             
and   Human    Decision     Processes     (1995).     
Constantine  Sedikides, Dan  Ariely, and  Nils Olsen, "Con­
textual  and  Procedural  Determinants  of  Partner  Selection:  
On  Asymmetric Dominance and  Prominence,"  Social      Cogni­
tion   (1999).   
Chapter 2: The Fallacy of Supply  and  Demand  
BASED  ON  
Dan   Ariely,  George  Loewenstein,  and   Drazen  Prelec,  
"Coherent  Arbitrariness:  Stable  Demand   Curves  without  
260 

bibliography   and  additional    readings    
261 
Stable    Preferences,"    Quarterly        Journal       of          Economics          
(2003). 
Dan   Ariely,  George   Loewenstein,   and   Drazen   Prelec,   
"Tom   Sawyer  and  the  Construction   of  Value,"  Journal     of     
Economic      Behavior    and  Organization       (2006).       
RELATED  READINGS  
Cass R. Sunstein,  Daniel Kahneman,  David  Schkade,  and  
liana  Ritov,  "Predictably  Incoherent  Judgments,"      Stanford      
Law   Review     (2002).     
Uri  Simonsohn,  "New   Yorkers  Commute   More  Every­
where:  Contrast  Effects  in  the  Field,"  Review    of       Economics       
and   Statistics     (2006).     
Uri  Simonsohn  and  George  Loewenstein,  "Mistake  #37:  
The  Impact  of Previously  Faced Prices on Housing  Demand,"  
Economic      Journal     (2006).     
Chapter 3: The Cost of Zero  Cost  
BASED  ON  
Kristina  Shampanier,  Nina  Mazar,  and  Dan  Ariely,  "How  
Small Is Zero Price? The True Value of Free Products,"    Marketing    
Science   (2007).   
RELATED  READINGS  
Daniel  Kahneman   and  Amos  Tversky,  "Prospect  The­
ory:  An  Analysis  of  Decision  under  Risk,"         Econometrica         
(1979). 
Eldar   Shafir,   Itamar   Simonson,   and   Amos   Tversky,   
"Reason-Based  Choice,"  Cognition      (1993).      

bibliography  and  additional    readingss    
Chapter  4: The  Cost of Social Norms 
BASED  ON  
Uri Gneezy  and  Aldo Rustichini,  "A Fine Is a Price,"   Jour­
nal   of  Legal   Studies    (2000).    
James  Heyman  and  Dan  Ariely,  "Effort  for  Payment:  A  
Tale of Two Markets,"  Psychological       Science     (2004).     
Kathleen  Vohs, Nicole Mead,  and  Miranda  Goode,  "The  
Psychological  Consequences  of Money,"  Science     (2006).     
RELATED  READINGS  
Margaret  S.  Clark  and  Judson  Mills,  "Interpersonal   At­
traction  in Exchange and  Communal  Relationships,"    Journal    
of  Personality     and  Social   Psychology,     Vol. 37 (1979),  12-24.  
Margaret  S. Clark,  "Record Keeping  in Two  Types of Re­
lationships,"  Journal     of  Personality      and   Social         Psychology,         
Vol.47  (1984),  549-557.  
Alan  Fiske,  "The  Four  Elementary  Forms  of  Sociality:  
Framework  for  a  Unified  Theory  of  Social Relations,"  Psy­
chological      Review      (1992).      
Pankaj   Aggarwal,   "The  Effects  of  Brand   Relationship   
Norms  on  Consumer  Attitudes  and  Behavior,"  Journal     of     
Consumer      Research     (2004).     
Chapter  5: The  Influence  of  Arousal  
BASED  ON  
Dan  Ariely  and  George  Loewenstein,  "The  Heat  of  the  
Moment:  The  Effect  of  Sexual  Arousal  on  Sexual  Decision  
Making,"  Journal    of  Behavioral     Decision     Making     (2006).     
RELATED  READINGS  
George Loewenstein,  "Out  of Control: Visceral Influences 
on  Behavior,"  Organizational         Behavior     and   Human      Deci­
sion   Processes     (1996).     
262 

bibliography   and  additional    readings    
263 
Peter  H.  Ditto,  David  A. Pizarro,  Eden  B. Epstein,  Jill  A.  
Jacobson,  and  Tara  K.  McDonald,  "Motivational  Myopia:  
Visceral  Influences  on  Risk  Taking  Behavior,"  journal      of      
Behavioral     Decision    Making     (2006).     
Chapter 6: The Problem of Procrastination  and Self-Control 
BASED  ON  
Dan   Ariely   and   Klaus  Wertenbroch,    "Procrastination,    
Deadlines,   and   Performance:   Self-Control   by   Precommit-
ment,"  Psychological      Science    (2002).    
RELATED  READINGS  
Ted  O'Donoghue  and  Mathew  Rabin,  "Doing  It Now  or  
Later,"  American     Economic     Review     (1999).     
Yaacov  Trope  and  Ayelet  Fishbach,  "Counteractive   Self-
Control  in  Overcoming  Temptation,"  journal     of     Personality     
and   Social    Psychology     (2000).     
Chapter  7: The High  Price of  Ownership  
BASED  ON  
Ziv  Carmon  and  Dan  Ariely,  "Focusing  on  the  Forgone:  
How  Value  Can  Appear  So Different  to  Buyers and  Sellers,"  
journal     of  Consumer     Research     (2000).     
James  Heyman,  Yesim Orhun,  and  Dan  Ariely,  "Auction  
Fever:  The  Effect   of  Opponents   and    Quasi-Endowment    
on  Product  Valuations,"  journal      of  Interactive          Marketing          
(2004). 
RELATED  READINGS  
Richard  Thaler,  "Toward  a Positive Theory  of  Consumer  
Choice,"  journal     of  Economic      Behavior     and        Organization        
(1980). 

bibliography  and  additional    readings    
Jack  Knetsch,  "The  Endowment   Effect  and  Evidence  of  
Nonreversible   Indifference   Curves,"   American           Economic           
Review,    Vol. 79 (1989),  1277-1284.  
Daniel  Kahneman,  Jack  Knetsch,  and   Richard  Thaler,  
"Experimental  Tests of the Endowment  Effect  and  the  Coase  
Theorem,"  Journal      of  Political    Economy      (1990).      
Daniel Kahneman,  Jack  Knetsch, and  Richard H.  Thaler,  
"Anomalies:  The  Endowment  of  Effect,  Loss  Aversion,  and  
the  Status Quo  Bias,"  Journal     of  Economic     Perspectives,    Vol.    
5  (1991),  193-206.  
Chapter 8: Keeping Doors  Open  
BASED  ON  
Jiwoong Shin and  Dan  Ariely, "Keeping Doors Open: The 
Effect  of  Unavailability  on  Incentives  to  Keep  Options  Via­
ble,"  Management       Science    (2004).    
RELATED  READINGS  
Sheena  Iyengar  and  Mark  Lepper,  "When  Choice  Is De-
motivating:  Can  One  Desire  Too Much  of  a  Good  Thing?"  
Journal     of  Personality     and  Social    Psychology      (2000).      
Daniel  Gilbert  and Jane Ebert,  "Decisions and  Revisions:  
The  Affective  Forecasting  of  Changeable  Outcomes,"    Jour­
nal   of  Personality     and  Social    Psychology      (2002).      
Ziv  Carmon,   Klause  Wertenbroch,  and  Marcel  Zeelen-
berg,  "When  Deliberating  Makes  Choosing  Feel  Like  Los­
ing,"  Journal     of  Consumer     Research     (2003).     
Chapter 9: The Effect of  Expectations  
BASED  ON  
John  Bargh, Mark  Chen,  and  Lara  Burrows,  "Automatic-
ity  of Social  Behavior: Direct  Effects  of Trait  Construct  and  
264 

bibliography    and  additional    readings    
Stereotype Activation  on Action," Journal     of  Personality      and      
Social    Psychology      (1996).      
Margaret  Shin, Todd  Pittinsky,  and  Nalini  Ambady,  "Ste­
reotype  Susceptibility: Identity  Salience and  Shifts in  Quanti­
tative  Performance,"  Psychological      Science     (1999).     
Sam   McClure,  Jian  Li,  Damon   Tomlin,  Kim   Cypert,   
Latané  Montague,  and  Read  Montague,  "Neural   Correlates   
of  Behavioral  Preference   for  Culturally   Familiar   Drinks,"   
Neuron     (2004).     
Leonard  Lee,  Shane  Frederick,  and  Dan  Ariely,  "Try  It,  
You'll  Like  It: The  Influence  of Expectation,   Consumption,   
and  Revelation  on  Preferences  for  Beer,"  Psychological        Sci­
ence    (2006).    
Marco  Bertini,  Elie  Ofek,  and  Dan  Ariely,  "To  Add  or  
Not  to  Add?  The  Effects  of  Add-Ons  on  Product   Evalua­
tion,"  Working  Paper, HBS  (2007).  
RELATED  READINGS  
George  Loewenstein,  "Anticipation  and  the  Valuation  of  
Delayed  Consumption,"   Economic      Journal     (1987).     
Greg  Berns,  Jonathan   Chappelow,   Milos  Cekic,  Cary  
Zink,  Giuseppe  Pagnoni,  and  Megan  Martin-Skurski,  "Neu-
robiological Substrates  of Dread,"  Science     (2006).     
Chapter  10:  The  Power of Price 
BASED  ON  
Leonard   Cobb,  George  Thomas,  David   Dillard,   Alvin   
Merendino,  and  Robert  Bruce,  "An  Evaluation  of  Internal  
Mammary   Artery   Ligation   by   a  Double-Blind  Technic,"  
New    England     Journal     of  Medicine      (1959).      
Bruce  Moseley, Kimberly  O'Malley,  Nancy  Petersen,  Terri  
Menke, Baruch Brody, David Kuykendall, John  Hollingsworth,  
265 

bibliography   and  additional    readings    
266 
Carol  Ashton,  and  Nelda  Wray,  "A  Controlled  Trial  of  Ar­
throscopic  Surgery  for  Osteoarthritis  of  the  Knee,"  New   En­
gland   Journal     of  Medicine     (2002).     
Baba  Shiv, Ziv  Carmon,  and  Dan  Ariely, "Placebo  Effects  
of  Marketing  Actions:  Consumers  May  Get What  They  Pay  
For,"  Journal     of  Marketing      Research     (2005).     
Rebecca  Waber, Baba  Shiv, Ziv  Carmon,  and  Dan  Ariely,  
"Paying More  for  Less Pain,"  Working  paper, MIT  (2007).  
RELATED  READINGS  
Tor  Wager,  James  Rilling,  Edward  Smith,  Alex  Sokolik,  
Kenneth  Casey,  Richard  Davidson,  Stephen  Kosslyn,  Robert  
Rose, and Jonathan  Cohen, "Placebo-Induced Changes in  fMRI  
in the Anticipation  and  Experience of Pain,"  Science    (2004).    
Alia  Crum  and  Ellen  Langer,  "Mind-Set  Matters:  Exer­
cise and  the  Placebo Effect,"  Psychological       Science    (2007).    
Chapters  11  and  12:  The Context  of Our  Character,  
Parts  I and  II  
BASED  ON  
Nina  Mazar   and  Dan  Ariely,  "Dishonesty   in   Everyday   
Life  and  Its  Policy  Implications,"  Journal     of  Public     Policy     
and   Marketing      (2006).      
Nina  Mazar,  On  Amir,  and  Dan  Ariely, "The  Dishonesty  
of  Honest  People:  A Theory  of Self-Concept  Maintenance,"  
Journal     of  Marketing      Research     (2008).     
RELATED  READINGS  
Max  Bazerman  and  George Loewenstein, "Taking the  Bias  
out of Bean Counting,"  Harvard    Business    Review    (2001).    
Maz  Bazerman,  George  Loewenstein,  and  Don  Moore,  
"Why  Good  Accountants  Do  Bad Audits:  The Real  Problem  

bibliography   and   additional     readings     
267 
Isn't  Conscious  Corruption.  It's Unconscious  Bias,"     Harvard     
Business    Review     (2002).     
Maurice Schweitzer and  Chris Hsee, "Stretching the Truth: 
Elastic Justification  and  Motivated  Communication  of Uncer­
tain Information,"  Journal     of  Risk   and  Uncertainty     (2002).     
Chapter  13:  Beer  and  Free  Lunches  
BASED  ON  
Dan  Ariely  and  Jonathan   Levav,  "Sequential   Choice  in  
Group Settings: Taking  the Road  Less Traveled  and  Less En­
joyed,"  Journal     of  Consumer     Research     (2000).     
Richard  Thaler  and  Shlomo  Benartzi,  "Save  More  To­
morrow:  Using  Behavioral  Economics  to  Increase  Employee  
Savings,"  Journal     of  Political    Economy      (2004).      
RELATED  READINGS  
Eric J. Johnson  and  Daniel  Goldstein,  "Do  Defaults  Save  
Lives?"  Science,    Vol. 302 (2003),  1338-1339.  



Index 
A 
AARP,  71  
Adventures        of   Tom    Sawyer,       The       
(Twain),  24-25,  39-40,  42-43  
advertising,  virtual  ownership  and,  136  
airlines: 
bankruptcy  of,  204  
frequent-flyer  miles  and,  227-28  
Allen,  Woody,  69  
Amazon: 
FREE!  shipping promotion  and,  
58-59,  62  
gift  certificate  experiment  and,  58  
Ambady,  Nalini,   169   
America  Online  (AOL),  59-60  
Amir,  On,  196-97,  206, 219-20,  261  
anchoring,  25-48  
arbitrary  coherence  and,  26-30,  
43-48 
compensation  for  work  and, 39-43 
enduring  effect  of,  34-36  
free  market and  free  trade and,  47-48  
housing  prices  and, 30-31 
imprinting  in  animals  compared  to,  
25,  34,  43  
life  decisions  and,  43-45  
prices  and, 25-36,  45-47  
Starbucks  and,  37-39  
supply  and  demand  and,  45-46  
switching  from  old  to  new  anchors  
and,31-36 
translation  of   first  decisions   into   
long-term  habits  and,  36-39  
angina  pectoris,  efficacy  of  surgical  
procedure  for,  173-74,  191  
antibiotics,  placebo  effect  and,  189  
Antiques       Roadshow,         130         
arbitrary  coherence:  
free  market and  free  trade and,  47-48  
life  decisions  and,  43-45  
prices  and, 26-30,  45-47  
supply  and  demand  and,  45-46  
arousal,  89-105  
painkillers  during  childbirth  and,  
103-4 
safe  driving  and,  102-3  
safe  sex  and,  89, 95, 96-97,  99,  
100-102,  107  
sexual,  decision  making  under,  
89-102,  106-8  

Index 
arousal         (continued)         
underprediction  of  effect  of,   98-99   
understanding  different  aspects  of  
ourselves  and,  104-5  
arthroscopic  knee  surgery,  174-76  
Asian-Americans,  stereotypes   about,   
169 
Assael,  James,  23  
Assael,  Salvador, 23-25,  26  
Association  of  Petroleum   Geologists,   
211 
attractiveness,  decoy  effect  and,   11-14,   
15 
auctions: 
arbitrary  coherence  and,  26-30  
online,   135-36   
second  price,  28n  
automobiles: 
precautionary  devices  in,  to  foil  
unsafe  teenage  behavior,  102-3  
routine  maintenance  of,  120-21  
test  driving,  expectations  and,  161  
automobile   sales:   
FREE!  oil  changes  and, 60-61 
relativity  problem  and, 2,  19, 21 
value  in  owner's  eyes and,  129,134,  
135 
B 
Bargh, John,  170  
Barlow, John  Perry,  86  
Beatles,  85  
beer: 
expectations'  impact  on  taste  of,  
157-59,  161-62,163-64,   172   
ordering  process  and  enjoyment   of,   
231-36 
behavioral   economics:   
conventional  economics  vs.,  xviii-xx,  
239-40 
free  lunches  from  perspective   of,   
240-43 
see    also   specific        topics        
Benartzi,  Shlomo,  242  
Bender,  Walter, 92 
benefits   (compensation):   
goodwill  created  by,  83  
recent  cuts  in,  82  
Berkeley,  University  of  California  at,  
91 
arousal  experiment  at, 91-97,  98-99  
Bertini, Marco,  159-60,  261-62  
Bible, 208, 215 
blogging,  about  overspending  and  debt  
problems,  122-23  
brain: 
brand  associations  of  Coke  and  Pepsi  
and,166-68 
honesty  and  reward centers  in, 203, 
208 
brand  associations,  taste  of  Coke  vs.  
Pepsi  and,   166-68   
bread-making  machines,  14-15  
Brouillet, Jean-Claude, 23-24 
Buffett,  Warren,  17  
bundling  of  services,  120-21  
Burning Man,  Black Rock  Desert,   Nev.,   
86-88 
Burrows,  Lara,  170  
C 
cable  television,   "trial"  promotions  
and,136-37 
"Can't  Buy Me  Love,"  85  
Carmon,  Ziv,  129, 130, 181, 262 
Carolina  Brewery, Chapel  Hill,  N.C.,  
231-37 
cash,  see   money   
caudate  nucleus,  203  
CEOs,  compensation  of,  16-17,  18  
Charlemagne,  188  
Charles  II, king  of England,  188  
cheating  on  tests,  198-202  
extreme  cheating  and, 221-22 
honor  code  statements  and, 212-13 
moral  benchmarks  and, 206-8,  213  
with  nonmonetary  currency  rather  
than cash,219-22 
self-restraint  in, 201-2,  208, 213 
checking  accounts,  FREE!,  60  
Chen,  Mark,  170  
childbirth,  painkillers  during,  103-4  
China: 
adoptions  in,  134  
lack  of  trust  in,  214  
savings  rate  in,  109  
270 

Index 
chocolate: 
in  free exchange   (Halloween)   
experiment,  56-58  
pricing  of,  FREE!  items  and,  51-54,  
64-65 
rational  cost-benefit  analysis  and,  
64-65 
Clark,  Margaret,  68  
closets,  consumerism  and  size  of,  110  
clothing,  worn  and  returned to  store  for  
full  refund,  196, 223 
Cobb,  Leonard,  173-74  
coffee: 
questioning  outlays  for,  44  
at  Starbucks vs.  Dunkin'   Donuts,   
37-39,47 
upscale  ambience  and,  39,159-60  
Coke,  taste  tests  of  Pepsi  and,  166-68  
cold  remedies,  price and  efficacy  of,  184  
colds,  antibiotics  as placebo  for,  189  
comparisons,  see  relativity  
compensation: 
cash  vs.  gift  rewards and,  82-83  
of  CEOs,  16-17,  18  
poetry  reading  experiment  and,  
40-42 
recent  cuts  in  benefits  and,  82  
social  exchange  in  workplace  and,  
80-83 
and  transformation of  activity  into  
work,  39-43  
see   also   salaries   
compensation  consulting   firms,   17   
conditioning,  placebo  effect  and,  179  
condoms: 
importance  of  widespread  
availability  of,   100-102   
and  willingness  to  engage  in  
unprotected  sex  when  aroused, 89, 
95,  96-97,  99,107  
conflicts: 
expectations  and  perception  of,  
156-57,171-72 
neutral  third party and,  172  
conformity,  ordering food  and  drink  
and,238 
Congress,  U.S.,  151,152,228  
ethics  reforms  in,  204-6  
consumerism,   109-10   
context  effects,  240  
control,  mistaken  perception  of,  243  
corporate  scandals,  196, 204, 214, 219, 
222-23 
cost-benefit   analysis:   
dishonesty  and, 202-3,  204  
relative  value  and,  64-65  
credit  cards,  110, 204 
"ice  glass"  method  for,  122  
self-control,  author's proposal  for,  
123-26,  242  
two-cycle  billing and,  228  
Crocodile       Dundee,      7-8      
Cypert,  Kim,  166-68  
D 
dating: 
decoy  effect  and,   10-14,15   
and  likelihood  of  engaging   in   
immoral  behaviors  when  aroused,  
94-95,  96,  97,107  
separation  of  social  and  market  
norms  and,  69,      75-76      
day  care,  tardiness  fines  at,  76-77  
deadlines,  setting  one's  own,   112-16,   
117,  118-19  
debt  blogging,  122-23  
decision   making:   
and  indecision   in  face  of  two  choices,  
151-53 
sexual  arousal and,  89-102,  106-8  
see   also   first   decisions;   options   
decoy  effect,  5-6,  8-15  
bread-making  machines  and, 14-15 
dating  and,  10-14,15  
Economist       subscriptions  and,  1-3,  
4-6,  9-10  
house  purchases  and,  8-9  
menu  pricing  and,  4  
vacation  packages  and,  10  
visual  representation  of,   9   
demand: 
price  changes  and,  46-47  
supply  and,  in  standard  economic  
framework,  45-46  
democracy,  dizzying abundance  of  
options  in,  148  
271 

Index 
Descartes,  Rene,  43  
diet,  procrastination  and   self-control   
and,  110-11,  116  
discounts: 
discounting  of  quality  along   with,   
183-87 
relativity  and,  19-20  
dishonesty,   195-230   
congressional  initiatives   against,   
204-6 
contemplation  of  moral  benchmarks  
and, 206-9,  213  
corporate  scandals  and,  196, 204, 
214,  219, 222-23 
cost-benefit   analysis  and, 202-3,  204  
decline  of  professional  ethics  and,  
209-11,213-14 
easier  when  removed  from  cash,  
217-30 
expense  reports and,  223-24  
human  nature and, 226-27 
oaths  and, 208-9,  211-13  
rationalization  of,  219, 222, 224, 
225-27,  229  
risk  of  being  caught  and, 201, 204 
small  acts  of,  197, 204,  217-18,  
227-28 
standard-issue  criminal   activities   
and,195,  196-97  
wardrobing  and,  196, 223 
see   also   cheating  on  tests;  honesty  
Dr.   Jekyll     and    Mr.   Hyde    (Stevenson),  98  
"door  game,"  143-48  
dopamine,  168  
dorsolateral  aspect  of  prefrontal cortex 
(DLPFC),  167  
drinks: 
energy,  impact  of  price  and  hype   on   
efficacy  of,  184-87  
expectations  and  taste  of,  see  taste  
ordering  process  and  enjoyment   of,   
231-38 
driving: 
teenage,  foiling  unsafe  behavior  in,  
102-3 
test,  expectations  and,  161  
drugs,  war  on,  customs  agents'  
willingness  to  risk  life  in,  84  
Duke  University  basketball   tickets,   
127-33 
Dunkin'  Donuts,  moving  anchor  to  
Starbucks  from,  37-39  
DVD  players,  FREE!  DVD   offers  and,  55  
E 
earmarking,  congressional   restrictions   
on,204-5 
Ebbers,  Bernie,  223  
economics,  standard:  
arbitrary  coherence  at odds  with,  43,  
45,47-48 
behavioral  economics  vs.,  xviii-xx,  
239-40 
cost-benefit   analysis  in,  64-65  
human  rationality  assumed  in,  xix,  
xx,239-40 
supply  and  demand  in,  45-46  
Economist        subscription  offers,  1-3,  
4-6,  9-10  
education,   84-86   
igniting  social  passion  for,  85-86  
"No  Child  Left  Behind"  policy  and,  85  
"elderly,"  behavior  affected  by  priming  
concept  of,  170-71  
empirical  tests,  in  science,  xv-xvi  
employees: 
payment  of,  see   compensation;   
salaries 
social  vs.  market norms  in  
companies'  relations  with,   80-84   
theft  and  fraud  at workplace  ascribed  
to,195-96 
endowment   effect,   129-35   
energy  drinks,  impact  of  price  and  hype  
on  efficacy  of,  184-87  
Enron  scandal,  196, 204, 219 
envy,  comparisons  and,  15-19  
epidurals,  103-4  
Escape     from    Freedom      (Fromm),  148  
Europe,  savings  rate  in,  109  
exercise,  procrastination and,  111  
expectations,  155-72  
beer  experiments  and,   157-59,   
161-62,163-64,172 
brand  associations  of  Coke  and  Pepsi  
and,166-68 
272 

Index 
conflicts  and,  156-57,171-72  
depth  of  description  in  caterers'  
offerings  and,  164  
exotic-sounding  ingredients  and,  
164-65 
football  plays  and,  155-56,  171  
garage  sales  and,  162-63  
knowledge   before  vs.  after  experience  
and,161-64 
marketing  hype  and,  186-87  
physiology   of  experience  altered  by,  
161-64,166-68 
placebo  effect  and,  173-94;  see     also     
placebo   effect   
sports car test  drives  and,  161  
stereotypes  and,  168-71  
taste  and,  157-68  
upscale  coffee  ambience  and,  159-60  
wineglasses  and,  165  
expense  reports, dishonesty   in,  223-24  
experience,  not  learning  from,  xvii  
experiments: 
extrapolation  of  findings  in,  xxi-xxii  
isolating  individual  forces  in,  xxi  
see    also   specific   topics   
F 
Fastow,  Andrew,  219  
fines,  in  social  context,  76-77  
first   decisions:   
power  of,  44  
shape  of our  lives and,  43  
translation  of,  into  long-term  habits,  
36-39 
see    also   anchoring   
first  impressions:  
imprinting  and, 25, 34,  43  
see    also   arbitrary  coherence  
Fiske,  Alan,  68  
food: 
expectations  and  taste  of,   164-65   
ordering process  and  enjoyment   of,   
237-38 
see    also   taste   
food  labels,  allure of  "zero" on, 61-62 
football  plays,  expectations  and  
perception  of,  155-56,  171  
Ford  Motor Company,  119-21  
France,  Amazon's  FREE!  shipping  
promotion  in,  59, 62 
Frederick,  Shane,  157, 161, 262 
FREE!,  49-63  
Amazon  gift  certificate offer  and,  58  
AOL   price structure and,  59-60  
checking  accounts or mortgages  and,  
60 
chocolate  pricing  experiment  and,  
51-54,   64-65   
exchanges and,55-58 
fear  of  loss  and,  54-55  
high-definition  DVD  players  and,  55  
history  of  zero  and,  50  
museum  admission  fees  and,  61  
oil  changes  with car purchases  and,  
60-61 
preventive  health  care  and,  62-63  
rational  cost-benefit  analysis  and,  
64-65 
shipping  offers  on  orders over  a  
certain  amount  and, 58-59,  62  
social  policy  and,  62-63  
time  considerations  and,  61  
free,  working  for,  71  
free  lunches,  240-44  
free  market,  47-48  
free  trade,  47-48  
Frenk,  Hanan,  xv  
frequent-flyer  miles,  227-28  
Freud,  Sigmund,  98, 203 
friendly  requests,  social  norms  and, 68, 
70-71,73-74,77-78 
Fromm,  Erich,  148  
functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  
(fMRI),  taste  test  of  Coke  and  
Pepsi  and,  166-68  
furniture,  assembling,  pride  of  
ownership  and,  135  
G 
garage  sales,  129-30,   162-63   
gasoline,  price increases  and  demand  
for,   47   
Gell-Mann,  Murray,  244  
gender  stereotypes,  169  
Gerbi  (Italian physician),  177  
gift  certificate experiment,  58  
273 

Index 
gifts: 
Burning Man  based  on  exchange  of,  
86-88 
cash  vs.,  as  employee  reward,  82-83  
mere  mention  of  money  and,  73—74  
social  vs.  market norms  and,  72-74  
Gneezy,  Uri,  76-77  
Gone    with    the   Wind,     150     
Goode,  Miranda,  74-75  
Google,  83  
goslings,  imprinting  in, 25, 34,  43  
government: 
social  contract between  citizens  and,  
84 
see    also   Congress,  U.S.  
gridlock,  legislative,  151, 152 
Guidelines        for   Lawyer             Courtroom             
Conduct       (Sweeney),  213  
guilt,  social  norms  and,  77  
H 
habits: 
first  decisions  translated  into,  
36-38 
questioning,   44   
Halloween  experiment,  56-58  
Hamlet  (Shakespeare), xviii-xix,  232  
Harvard  Business  School,   197-98   
honesty  experiment  at,  198-202  
health  care,   110-11   
bundling  of  medical  tests  and  
procedures  and,  119-21  
defeating  procrastination in,   117-21   
FREE!  procedures and,  62-63  
mandatory  checkups  and,  118  
placebo  effect  and,  173-94;  see     also     
placebo   effect   
price  of  medical  treatments and,  176,  
180-87,  190  
public  policy  and  spending on,  190  
scientifically  controlled  trials  and,  
173-76 
self-imposed  deadlines  and,  118-19  
helping,  thinking  about  money  and, 74, 
75 
herding,  36-38  
self-herding  and,  37-38  
Heyman,  James,  69-71,  136,  262-63  
HIV-AIDS,  90  
Holy  Roman  emperors, placebo   effect   
and,188 
Home  Depot,  78  
Honda,   120,121   
honesty,   195-230   
contemplation  of  moral  benchmarks  
and,   206-9,  213  
dealing  with  cash  and,  217-30  
importance  of,  214-15  
as  moral virtue, 203 
oaths  and, 208-9,  211-13,  215  
reward  centers  in  brain and, 203, 
208 
Smith's  explanation  for, 202, 214 
superego  and, 203-4,  208  
see    also    dishonesty    
Hong,  James,  21  
honor  codes,  212-13  
hormones,  expectation  and,  179  
house   sales:   
anchoring  and, 30-31 
relativity  and, 8-9,  19  
value  in  owner's  eyes  and,  129, 135 
I 
ice cream,  FREE!,  time  spent  on  line  for,  
61 
"Ikea  effect,"  135  
imprinting, 25, 34, 43 
see    also   anchoring   
indecision,   151-53   
individualism,   68   
thinking  about  money  and, 74, 75 
ingredients,  exotic-sounding,   164-65   
insurance  fraud,  196, 223 
internal  mammary artery   ligation,   
173-74,  191  
inventiveness,  68  
IRA    (Irish Republican  Army),   156-57   
Iran,  lack  of  trust in,  215  
irrational  behaviors, xix-xx 
opportunities  for  improvement  and,  
240-44 
systematic  and  predictable  nature  of,  
xx,   239   
see    also   specific   topics   
1RS   (Internal Revenue  Service), 196 
274 

Index 
J 
Japan,  savings  rate  in,  109  
jealousy,  comparisons  and,  15-19  
Jobst  suit,   192-94   
Johnston,  David  Cay, 204 
judgment  and  decision  making   (JDM),   
xviii 
see   also   behavioral   economics   
"Just  say  no"  campaign,  100,101  
K 
Kahneman,  Daniel,   19,129   
knee  surgery, arthroscopic,  174-76  
Knetsch, Jack,  129  
Koran,  215  
L 
Latin  America, lack  of  trust in,  214  
Lay,  Kenneth,  219  
Leaves     of   Grass    (Whitman), 40-41 
Lee,  Leonard, 21, 157-59,  161, 263 
legal   profession:   
attempts  at improving  ethics  of,  213-14  
decline  of  ethics  and  values  in,  209-10  
leisure,  blurring  of  partition   between   
work  and,  80,  81  
Leland, John, 122-23 
Leo  III, Pope,  188  
Levan, Jonathan, 231-37,  263  
Li,  Jian,   166-68   
Lincoln,  Abraham,  177  
Linux,81 
lobbyists,  congressional  restrictions  on,  
205 
Loewenstein,  George, 21, 26, 30-31,  39,  
89,  263-64  
Lorenz,  Konrad, 25, 43 
loss: 
aversion  to,  134,137,138,148-49  
fear  of,  54-55  
loyalty: 
in  business-customer   relations,  78-79  
of  employees  to  their  companies,  
80-84 
M 
Macbeth       (Shakespeare),  188  
major,  college  students'  choice  of,  141-42  
manufacturer's  suggested  retail  price  
(MSRP),30,45 
marketing: 
high  price tag  and,  24-25  
hype  of,  related  to   satisfaction   
derived  from  product,  186-87,  
190-91 
relativity  and,  1-6,  9-10  
"trial" promotions  and,  136-37  
zero  cost  and,  49-50  
market  norms,  67-88  
companies'  relations  with  their  
customers  and,  78-80  
companies'  relations  with  their  
employees  and,  80-84  
doing  away  with,   86-88   
education  and,  85  
mere  mention  of  money   and,   
73-75 
mixing  signals  of  social  norms  and,  
69, 73-74,75-77,  79, 214 
reducing  emphasis  on,  88  
social  norms  kept  separate  from,  
67-69,75-76,   77-78   
willingness  to  risk  life  and,  84  
working  for  gifts  and,  72-74  
working  under  social  norms  vs.,  
69-72 
Maryland  Judicial Task  Force,  210  
Mazar,  Nina,  196-97,  206,  219-20,  
224,264 
McClure,  Sam,  166-68  
Mead,  Nicole,   74-75   
medical  benefits,  recent cuts  in,  82  
medical  care,  see  health   care   
medical   profession:   
decline  of  ethics  and  values  in,  210  
salaries  of,  as  practicing  physicians  
vs.  Wall  Street  advisers,  18-19  
memory  of  previous  prices,  price  
changes  and, 46-47 
Mencken,  H.  L., 18 
menu  pricing,  in  restaurants,  4  
Mills,  Judson,  68  
mistakes,  repeated,  and  failure  to  learn  
from  experience,  xvii  
MIT  Sloan  School  of  Management,  
92 
275 

Index 
money: 
benefits  of,  86  
dishonesty  with  nonmonetary  objects  
vs.,  217-30  
doing  away  with,   86—88   
impact  of  mere  mention  of,  73-75  
switch  away  from,  to  electronic  
instruments,  230  
Montague,  Latané,   166-68   
Montague,  Read,  166-68  
moral  benchmarks, dishonesty   curbed   
by  contemplation  of,  206-9,  213  
morality: 
in  "cold"  vs.  aroused  state,  94-95,  
96,97 
see   also   cheating  on  tests;  dishonesty;  
honesty 
mortgages,  60  
Moseley,  J. B.,  174-76  
movie  reviews,  enjoyment  affected   by,   
166 
mummy  powder,   177-78   
museums,  free-entrance days  or  times  
at,  61  
N 
need  for  uniqueness,  ordering food  or  
drinks  and,  237-38  
New     England      Journal       of  Medicine,       175       
New     York    Times,     4,  18,  21,122-23  
Niskanen,  William  A.,  205-6  
"No  Child  Left  Behind"  policy,  85  
Norton,  Mike,  135  
nucleus  accumbens, 203, 208 
O 
oaths,  honesty  and, 208-9,  211-13,  215  
Ofek,  Elie, 159-60,  264  
online  auctions,  135-36  
open-source  software,  81  
options,   139-53   
abundance  of,  in  modern  democracy,  
148 
aversion  to  loss  and,  148-49  
college  students'  choice  of  major  and,  
141-42 
consciously  closing,   150-51   
"door  game"  and,   143-48   
downside   of,  140  
important,  vanishing  of,  149  
romantic  relationships  and,  142, 148, 
150 
sale  prices  and,  148-49  
similar,  choosing  between,   151-53   
Xiang  Yu's story  and,  139-40  
ordering  food  or drinks,  231-38  
enjoyment  of  choices  and, 232, 
235-36,  237, 238 
need  for  uniqueness  and,  237-38  
out  loud  vs.  in  private,  231-32,  
233-36,237-38 
strategy  for, 238 
Orhun,  Yesim,  136,  264-65  
osteoarthritis,  arthroscopic  knee  
surgery  and,  174-76  
outsourcing,  81-82  
ownership,   127-38   
aversion  to  loss  and,  134,137,  138  
Duke  University  basketball  tickets  
and,127-33 
of  points  of  view,  137-38  
pride  of,  putting  work  into   something   
and,135 
"trial"  promotions  and,  136-37  
value  in  owner's  eyes  increased  by,  
129-35 
virtual,  online  auctions  and,  135-36  
P 
pain,  experience  of,  xiii-xiv,   xvi-xvii   
expectation  and,  179  
painkillers: 
epidural,  during  childbirth,  103-4  
price  and  efficacy  of,   180-84   
passion: 
underprediction  of  effect  of,  98-99  
see   also   arousal   
pay,  see  compensation;  salaries  
pearls,  23-25  
black,  demand  for, 24-25,  26  
Pepsi,  taste  tests  of  Coke  and,  166-68  
perception: 
expectations  and,  155-72;  see     also     
expectations;  taste  
inherent  biases  in,  xvi-xvii  
Perfectly      Legal    (Johnston), 204 
276 

Index 
personal  lives:  
arbitrary  coherence and,  43-45  
separation  of  social  and  market  
norms  and, 67-69,  75-76,  77-78  
petroleum  geologists,  decline  of  ethics  
and  values  among,  211  
pharmaceuticals,  210  
marketing  hype  and  efficacy   of,   
190-91 
price  and  efficacy  of,  180-84,  190  
Pittinsky,  Todd,  169  
Pittman,  Bob,  60  
placebo  effect,   173-94   
author's  experience  with Jobst  suit  
and,192-94 
conditioning  and,  179  
energy  drinks  and,  184-87  
faith  in  drug, procedure, or caregiver 
and,179 
Gerbi's worm  secretions  and,  177  
knowingly  treating patients  with,  
187-90 
marketing  hype  and,  186-87,190-91  
moral  dilemmas  in  experiments  on,  
191,  194  
mummy  powder  and,  177-78  
origin  of  term,  176-77  
pharmaceuticals  and,  180-84,  190  
power  of  suggestion  and,  178-79  
price  and,  176,180-87,190  
royal  touch  and,  188  
surgical  procedures and,  173-76,  178,  
191 
pleasure,  spending  decisions  and,  44  
pleasure  centers  in  brain,  168  
poetry  reading experiment,  40-42  
points  of  view:  
expectations  and,  155-57  
ownership  of,   137-38   
pork-barrel  spending,   204-5   
Prelec,  Drazen, 26, 27, 39, 265 
presentation,  taste of  food  and,  165  
preventive  medicine,  110-11,   117-21   
see   also   health  care  
prices: 
anchoring and, 25-36,  45-47  
arbitrary  coherence and,  26-30,  
45-47 
demand  and  changes  in,  46-47  
high,  desirability  of  a product  and,  
24-25 
of  housing,  30-31  
implied  difference  in  quality  and,  
180 
manufacturer's  suggested  retail  
(MSRP),30,  45  
placebo  effect  and,  176,  180-87,  
190 
supply  and  demand  and,  45-46  
switching  from  old  to  new  anchors  
and,31-36 
upscale  coffee  ambience  and, 39, 
159-60 
see   also    FREE!    
procrastination,   109-26   
effectiveness   of  external voice  and,  
116-17,  118  
health  care  and,  110-11,   117-21   
recognizing  and  admitting  problem  
with,   115-16   
root  of  word,  111  
routine  automobile  maintenance  and,  
119-21 
setting  one's  own  deadlines   and,   
112-16,  117,  118-19  
of  university  students,   111-16   
productivity,  social  norms  in  workplace  
and,80-84 
profession,  origin  of  word,  209  
professional  ethics,  215  
attempts  at improvement  of,  213-14  
decline  in,  209-11  
professional  oaths, 208-9,  213  
purchases,  price imprinting  and,  30  
Q 
Qin  (Ch'in)  dynasty,  139  
R 
Rapp,  Gregg,  4  
rational  economic  model,  xix, xx, 
239-40 
reciprocity,  social  vs.  market  norms  
and,68-69 
regulations,  self-destructive   behaviors   
restrained  by,  118  
277 

Index 
relativity,  1-21  
bread-making  machines  and, 14-15 
changing  focus  from  narrow to  wide  
and,19-20 
controlling  circles  of  comparison  
and,  19,21  
dating  and,  10-14,  15  
dealing  with  problem  of,  19-21  
decoy  effect  and, 5-6,  8-15  
Economist        subscription  offers  and,  
1-3, 4-6,  9-10  
house  purchases  and, 8-9,  19  
jealousy  and  envy  springing  from,  
15-19 
prices  for  various products and,  29  
restaurant  menu  pricing  and,  4  
salaries  and,  16-19  
television  pricing  and,  3-4  
tendency  to  compare things  that  are  
easily  comparable and,  8-9  
vacation  planning  and,  10  
visual  demonstration  of,   7   
relocation,  anchoring  to  housing  prices  
and,30-31 
restaurants: 
with  lines  to  get  in, 36,  37  
menu  pricing  of,   4   
ordering  in, 231-38;  see   also   ordering   
food  or  drinks  
social  norms  of  dating  and,       75-76       
robberies,  195  
romantic  relationships:  
options  in,  142, 148, 150 
separation  of  social  and  market  
norms  and,  69,  75-76  
see   also    dating    
royal  touch,  188  
Rustichini,  Aldo,       76-77       
S 
safe  sex,   100-102   
and  willingness  to  engage   in   
unprotected  sex  when  aroused, 89, 
95,  96-97,   99,107   
salaries,  16-19,  88  
of  CEOs,  16-17,  18  
co-workers'  comparisons  of,  16  
happiness  and,  17-18  
and  move  from  hourly  rates  to  
monthly  pay,  80  
performance-based,  in  education,  85  
relinquishing  dreams  for  increase  in,  
18-19 
"save  more tomorrow"  mechanism  
and,242 
willingness  to  risk  life  and,  84  
see   also    compensation    
sale  prices,  148-49  
relativity  and,  19-20  
Sarbanes-Oxley  Act of 2002,  204,  205-6  
savings,   109-11   
decline  in  rate  of,   109-10   
defeating  procrastination in,   122-26   
for  retirement, from  perspective  of  
standard  economics  vs.  behavioral  
economics,  241  
"save  more tomorrow"  mechanism  
and,242 
self-control  credit card  and,  123-26  
Sawyer,  Tom, 24-25,  39-40,  42-43  
Schmalensee,  Richard, 92 
schools: 
soda  machines  at, 204 
see   also    education    
second  price auctions,  28n  
Securities  and Exchange  Commission  
(SEC),  205  
self-control,   109-26   
credit  cards and,  123-26  
decline  in  savings  rate  and,  109-10  
effectiveness   of  external voice  and,  
116-17 
procrastination  of  university   students   
and,111-16 
self-destructive  behaviors,  regulations  
on,118 
self-herding,   37-38   
self-reliance,  68  
thinking  about  money  and,  74-75  
self-shame,  debt  blogging  and,  122-23  
sensei  (martial arts  master),   offering   
pay to,71-72 
sex: 
and  likelihood  of  engaging   in   
immoral  behaviors, 94-95,  96, 97, 
107 
278 

Index 
and  preferences  in  "cold"  vs.  aroused  
state,  89, 94, 96,  97,106  
safe  vs.  unprotected,  89, 95,  96-97,  
99,   100-102,107   
in  social  vs.  market context,  68-69  
as taboo  subject  for  study,  92  
sex  education,  101  
sexual  arousal:  
decision  making  under,  89-102,  
106-8 
see    also   arousal   
Shakespeare,  William,  xviii-xix,  188,  
232,239-40 
Shampanier,  Kristina, 51, 265 
Shin,  Jiwoong,  142-43,147,  265-66  
Shin,  Margaret, 169 
shipping,  FREE!  on  orders over  a  certain  
amount,  58-59,  62  
Shiv,  Baba, 181, 266 
Shultz,  Howard,  39  
Sicherman,  Nachum,  71-72  
Silva, Jose,  114  
Simonsohn,  Uri, 30-31 
Sinclair,  Upton,  227  
Skilling, Jeffrey, 219, 223 
Skype  account  of  author, theft  from,  
224-26 
Smart  Cards,  124  
Smith,  Adam, xx,  133, 138, 202, 214 
SoBe  Adrenaline  Rush  experiments,  
184-87 
social  norms,  67-88  
Burning Man  and,  86-88  
companies'  relations  with  their  
customers  and,  78-80  
companies'  relations  with  their  
employees  and,  80-84  
education  and,  84-86  
friendly  requests  and, 68,  70-71,  
73-74,77-78 
giving greater emphasis  to,  87-88  
market  norms  kept  separate  from,  
67-69,75-76,   77-78   
mere  mention  of  money  and,  73-75  
mixing  signals  of  market norms  and,  
69,  73-74,  75-77,  79, 214 
offering  to  pay  for   Thanksgiving   
and,   67-68,  76  
return  to,  once  market norm  is  
removed,  77  
romantic  relationships  and,  69,  75-76  
willingness  to  risk  life  and,  84  
working  for  gifts  and,  72-74  
working  under  market norms  vs.,  
69-72 
social  policy,  power  of  FREE!  and,  62-63  
Socrates,  44  
sounds,  annoying,   anchoring   
experiments  with,  31-36  
sports,  expectations  and  perception   of,   
155-56,171 
Starbucks,  37-39  
moving  anchor from  Dunkin'   Donuts   
to,37-39 
moving  up  to  higher  price  bracket  at,  
38,47 
State  Farm,  78  
stereotypes,  168-71  
behavior  of  people  not  part  of  
stereotyped  group  affected   by,   
169-71 
behavior  of  stereotyped  people  
affected  by,  168  
purpose  of,  168  
Stevenson,  Robert Louis,  98  
subscription  pricing,  1-3, 4-6,  9-10  
superego,  203-4,  208  
supply  and  demand:  
memory  of  previous  prices and, 46-47 
in  standard economic  framework,  
45-46 
surgery,  210  
placebo  effect  and,  173-76,178,  191  
price  and  efficacy  of,  176  
Sutton,  Willie,  230  
Sweeney,  Dennis  M.,  213  
T 
taste,   157-68   
of  beer,  expectations  and,   157-59,   
161-62, 163-64,172 
of  coffee,  upscale  ambience  and,  
159-60 
of  Coke  vs.  Pepsi,   166-68   
depth  of  description  in  caterers'  
offerings  and,  164  
279 

Index 
taste         (continued)         
exotic-sounding   ingredients   and,   
164-65 
presentation  and,  165  
wineglasses  and,  165  
taxes,  204  
cheating  on,  196  
demand  impacted  by, 46-47 
teenagers: 
safe  driving  and,  102-3  
sexual  activity  of,  90, 100-102 
television: 
cable,  "trial" promotions  and,  
136-37 
relativity  and  displays  of,  3-4  
Ten  Commandments,  16, 207-9,  213,  
216 
tests: 
standardized,  85  
see   also   cheating  on   tests   
Thaler,  Dick,  129, 242 
Thanksgiving,   offering  to  pay  for,  
67-68,  76  
30-day  money-back  guarantees,  
137 
Thoreau,  Henry  David,  121  
Tomlin,  Damon,   166-68   
"trial"  promotions,  136-37  
Tversky,  Amos,  19  
Twain,  Mark, 24-25,  39-40,  42-43  
two-cycle  billing,  228  
U 
uniqueness,   need  for,  237-38  
university   students:   
choice  of  major  by,  141-42  
procrastination  among,   111-16   
V 
vacation  planning,   10   
Veladone-Rx  experiment,   181-84   
ventromedial  prefrontal  cortex  
(VMPFC),  167  
Vickrey,  William,  28n  
violence,  political  points  of  view  and,  
156-57 
virtual  ownership,  online  auctions  and,  
135-36 
Vohs,  Kathleen,  74-75  
volunteering,   71   
vulnerabilities,  awareness  of,  44  
W 
Waber,  Rebecca,  181, 182-83,  266  
wardrobing,  196, 223 
Weisberg,  Ron,  xv  
Wertenbroch,  Klaus,  112, 266 
Whitman,  Walt, 40-41 
"Whoever  you  are holding  me  now   in   
hand"  (Whitman), 40-41 
Williams-Sonoma,  14-15  
wineglasses,   taste  affected   by,  165  
wine  prices, 26-27,  29  
Winston,  Harry,  24  
working: 
activity  transformed  into,  by  
compensation,  39-43  
blurring  of  partition  between   leisure   
and,80,81 
for  free,  71  
for  gifts  vs.  payment,  72-73  
under  nonmonetary  social  norms  vs.  
market  norms, 69-72 
Wray,  Nelda,  175  
X 
Xiang  Yu,  139-40  
Y 
Young, Jim, 21 
Z 
zero,  49-63  
on  food  labels,  61-62  
history  of,  50  
see   also      FREE!      
280 