



  
START WITH 
START WITH START WITH 
START WITH 
WHY
WHYWHY
WHY 
HOW GREAT LEADERS INSPIRE 
EVERYONE TO TAKE ACTION 
SIMON SINEK
SIMON SINEKSIMON SINEK
SIMON SINEK 
PORTFOLIO 

 
 
 
 
 
PORTFOLIO 
Published by the Penguin Group 
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. Penguin Group (Canada), 90 
Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) 
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England 
Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) Penguin Books 
Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia 
Group Pty Ltd) 
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park,New Delhi- 110017, India 
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, 
New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) 
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, 
Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa 
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England 
First published in 2009 by Portfolio, a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc. 
7 9 10 8 6 
Copyright © Simon Sinek, 2009 All rights reserved 
"The Sneetches" from The Sneetches and Other Stories by Dr. Seuss. Trademark TM and copyright © by Dr. Seuss 
Enterprises, L.P. 1953,1954,1961, renewed 1989. All rights reserved. Used by permission of Random House 
Children's Books, a division of Random House, Inc. and International Creative Management, Inc., agents for Dr. 
Seuss Enterprises, L.P. 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS C ATALO GIN G -1N - P UBLI C AT IO N DATA Sinek, Simon. 
Start with why: how great leaders inspire everyone to take action / by Simon Sinek. p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. ISBN 978-1-59184-280-4 1. Leadership. I. Tide. HD57.7.S549 2009 
658.4*092—dc22 2009021862 
Printed in the United States of America Set in Minion 
Designed by Victoria Hartman 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored  in  or  introduced  into  a  retrieval  system,  or  transmitted,  in  any  form  or  by  any  means  (electronic, 
mechanical,  photocopying,  recording  or  otherwise), without  the  prior  written  permission  of  both  the 
copyright owner and the above publisher of this book. 
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without the 
permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized electronic editions 
and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrightable materials. Your support of the author's 
rights is appreciated. 
While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers and Internet addresses at the 
time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author assumes any responsibility for errors, or for changes 
that occur after publication. Further, publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any 
responsibility for author or third-party Web sites or their content. 

 
 
 
 
 
For Victoria,  
who finds good ideas  
and makes them great 
 

 
 
 
 
 
There  are  leaders  and  there  are  those  who  lead.  Leaders 
hold  a  position  of  power  or  influence.  Those  who  lead 
inspire us. 
Whether individuals or organizations, we follow those who lead 
not because we have to, but because we want to. We follow those 
who lead not for them, but for ourselves. 
This is a book for those who want to inspire others and for those 
who want to find someone to inspire them. 

CONTENTS 
Introduction: Why Start with Why? 1 
PART 1
PART 1PART 1
PART 1:
::
: A WORLD THAT DOESN'T START WITH WHY 
1. Assume You Know 11 
2. Carrots and Sticks 17 
PART
PARTPART
PART 2: AN ALTERNATIVE PERSPECTIVE 
3. The Golden Circle 41 
4. This Is Not Opinion, This Is Biology 57 
5. Clarity, Discipline and Consistency 71 
PART
PARTPART
PART 3: LEADERS NEED A FOLLOWING 
6. The Emergence of Trust 91 
7. How a Tipping Point Tips 127 
PART 4:
PART 4:PART 4:
PART 4: HOW TO RALLY THOSE WHO BELIEVE 
8. Start with WHY, but Know HOW 147 
9. Know WHY. Know HOW. Then WHAT? 171  
10. Communication Is Not About Speaking, 
It's About Listening 179 
 
  
 

 
PART 5:
PART 5:PART 5:
PART 5: THE BIGGEST CHALLENGE IS SUCCESS 
11. When WHY Goes Fuzzy 195 
12. Split Happens 205 
PART 6:
PART 6:PART 6:
PART 6: DISCOVER WHY 
13. The Origins of a WHY 233 
14. The New Competition 247 
Acknowledgments 251 
Notes 257 
 
 
 

 
1 
INTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTIONINTRODUCTION
INTRODUCTION 
WHY START WITH WHY? 
This  book  is  about  a  naturally  occurring  pattern,  a  way  of  thinking, 
acting  and  communicating  that  gives  some  leaders  the  ability  to 
inspire  those  around  them.  Although  these  "natural-born  leaders" 
may  have  come  into  the  world  with  a  predisposition to  inspire,  the 
ability  is  not  reserved  for  them  exclusively.  We  can  all  learn  this 
pattern.  With  a  little  discipline,  any  leader  or  organization  can  in-
spire  others,  both  inside  and  outside  their  organization,  to  help 
advance their ideas and their vision. We can all learn to lead. 
The  goal  of  this  book  is  not  simply  to  try  to  fix  the  things  that 
aren't working. Rather, I wrote this book as a guide to focus on and 
amplify the things that do  work. I do  not aim to upset the solutions 
offered by others. Most of the answers we get, when based on sound 
evidence,  are  perfectly  valid.  However,  if  we're  starting  with  the 
wrong  questions,  if  we  don't  understand  the  cause, then  even  the 
right  answers  will  always  steer  us  wrong  ...  eventually.  The  truth, 
you see, is always revealed... eventually. 
The stories that follow are of those individuals and organizations 
that naturally embody this pattern. They are the ones that start with 
Why. 

START WITH WHY 
2 
1. 
 
The  goal  was  ambitious.  Public  interest  was  high.  Experts  were 
eager to contribute. Money was readily available. 
Armed   with   every   ingredient   for   success,   Samuel   Pierpont 
Langley  set  out  in  the  early  1900s  to  be  the  first man  to  pilot  an 
airplane.  Highly  regarded,  he  was  a  senior  officer at  the  Smithso-
nian  Institution,  a  mathematics  professor  who  had  also  worked  at 
Harvard.  His  friends  included  some  of  the  most  powerful  men  in 
government and business, including Andrew Carnegie and Alexan-
der  Graham  Bell.  Langley  was  given  a  $50,000  grant from  the  War 
Department to fund his project, a tremendous amount of money for 
the  time.  He  pulled  together  the  best  minds  of  the day,  a  veritable 
dream team of talent and know-how. Langley and his team used the 
finest  materials,  and  the  press  followed  him  everywhere.  People  all 
over  the  country  were  riveted  to  the  story,  waiting  to  read  that  he 
had  achieved  his  goal.  With  the  team  he  had  gathered  and  ample 
resources, his success was guaranteed. 
Or was it? 
A  few  hundred  miles  away,  Wilbur  and  Orville  Wright  were 
working  on  their  own  flying  machine.  Their  passion to  fly  was  so 
intense  that  it  inspired  the  enthusiasm  and  commitment  of  a  ded-
icated  group  in  their  hometown  of  Dayton,  Ohio.  There  was  no 
funding  for  their  venture.  No  government  grants.  No  high-level 
connections.  Not  a  single  person  on  the  team  had  an  advanced 
degree  or  even  a  college  education,  not  even  Wilbur  or  Orville.  But 
the  team  banded  together  in  a  humble  bicycle  shop  and  made  their 
vision  real.  On  December  17,  1903,  a  small  group  witnessed  a  man 
take flight for the first time in history. 
How  did  the  Wright  brothers  succeed  where  a  better-equipped, 
better-funded and better-educated team could not? 

WHY STAR WITH WHY 
3 
It wasn't luck. Both the Wright brothers and Langley were highly 
motivated.  Both  had  a  strong  work  ethic.  Both  had  keen  scientific 
minds.  They  were  pursuing  exactly  the  same  goal,  but  only  the 
Wright  brothers  were  able  to  inspire  those  around  them  and  truly 
lead  their  team  to  develop  a  technology  that  would change  the 
world. Only the Wright brothers started with Why. 
2. 
In  1965,  students  on  the  campus  of  the  University  of  California, 
Berkeley,  were  the  first  to  publicly  burn  their  draft  cards  to  protest 
America's  involvement  in  the  Vietnam  War.  Northern California 
was  a  hotbed  of  antigovernment  and  antiestablishment  sentiment; 
footage  of  clashes  and  riots  in  Berkeley  and  Oakland  was  beamed 
around the globe, fueling sympathetic movements across the United 
States  and  Europe.  But  it  wasn't  until  1976,  nearly  three  years  after 
the  end  of  America's  military  involvement  in  the  Vietnam  conflict, 
that a different revolution ignited. 
They  aimed  to  make  an  impact,  a  very  big  impact,  even  chal-
lenge  the  way  people  perceived  how  the  world  worked.  But  these 
young revolutionaries did not throw stones or take up arms against 
an authoritarian regime. Instead, they decided to beat the system at 
its own game. For Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs, the cofounders of 
Apple  Computer,  the  battlefield  was  business  and  the  weapon  of 
choice was the personal computer. 
The  personal  computer  revolution  was  beginning  to  brew  when 
Wozniak  built  the  Apple  I.  Just  starting  to  gain  attention,  the  tech-
nology  was  primarily  seen  as  a  tool  for  business.  Computers  were 
too  complicated  and  out  of  the  price  range  of  the  average  individ-
ual.  But  Wozniak,  a  man  not  motivated  by  money,  envisioned  a 
nobler  purpose  for  the  technology.  He  saw  the  personal  computer 
as  a  way  for  the  little  man  to  take  on  a  corporation.  If  he  could 

START WITH WHY 
4 
figure out a way to get it in the hands of the individual, he thought, 
the computer would give nearly anyone the ability to perform many 
of  the  same  functions  as  a  vastly  better  resourced company.  The 
personal computer could level the playing field and change the way 
the  world  operated.  Woz  designed  the  Apple  I,  and  improved  the 
technology with the Apple II, to be affordable and simple to use. 
No matter how visionary or how brilliant, a great idea or a great 
product isn't worth much if no one buys it. Wozniak's best friend at 
the  time,  the  twenty-one-year-old  Steve  Jobs,  knew exactly  what  to 
do. Though he had experience selling surplus electronics parts, Jobs 
would prove to be much more than a good salesman. He wanted to 
do something significant in the world, and building a company was 
how he was  going to do it. Apple was the tool he used to ignite his 
revolution. 
In  their  first  year  in  business,  with  only  one  product,  Apple 
made  a  million  dollars  in  revenues.  By  year  two,  they  did  $10  mil-
lion  in  sales.  In  their  fourth  year  they  sold  $100 million  worth  of 
computers.  And  in  just  six  years,  Apple  Computer  was  a  billion- 
dollar company with over 3,000 employees. 
Jobs  and  Woz  were  not  the  only  people  taking  part  in  the  per-
sonal computer revolution. They weren't the only smart guys in the 
business; in fact, they didn't know much about business at all. What 
made Apple special was not their ability to build such a fast-growth 
company.  It  wasn't  their  ability  to  think  differently  about  personal 
computers. What has made Apple special is that they've been able to 
repeat  the  pattern  over  and  over  and  over.  Unlike  any  of  their 
competitors,  Apple  has  successfully  challenged  conventional  think-
ing within the computer industry, the small electronics industry, the 
music   industry,   the   mobile   phone   industry   and   the   broader 
entertainment  industry.  And  the  reason  is  simple.  Apple  inspires. 
Apple starts with Why. 

WHY STAR WITH WHY 
5 
3. 
He  was  not  perfect.  He  had  his  complexities.  He  was  not  the  only 
one  who  suffered  in  a  pre-civil  rights  America,  and  there  were 
plenty of other charismatic speakers. But Martin Luther King Jr. had 
a gift. He knew how to inspire people. 
Dr.  King  knew  that  if  the  civil  rights  movement  was  to  succeed, 
if there was to be a real, lasting change, it would take more than him 
and  his  closest  allies.  It  would  take  more  than  rousing  words  and 
eloquent   speeches.  It   would  take  people,  tens  of  thousands   of 
average citizens, united by a single vision, to change the country. At 
11:00 a.m. on August 28, 1963, they would send a message to Wash-
ington that it was time for America to steer a new course. 
The  organizers  of  the  civil  rights  movement  did  not  send  out 
thousands of invitations, nor was there a Web site to check the date. 
But the people came. And they kept coming and coming. All told, a 
quarter of a million people descended on the nation's capital in time 
to  hear  the  words  immortalized  by  history,  delivered  by  the  man 
who would lead a movement that would change America forever: "I 
have a dream." 
The ability to attract  so  many people from across the  country, of 
all  colors  and  races,  to  join  together  on  the  right  day,  at  the  right 
time,  took  something  special.  Though  others  knew  what  had  to 
change  in  America  to  bring  about  civil  rights  for  all,  it  was  Martin 
Luther King who was able to inspire a country to change not just for 
the good of a minority, but for the good of everyone. Martin 
Luther King started with Why. 
.  .  . 
There are leaders and there are those who lead. With only 6 percent 
market  share  in  the  United  States  and  about  3  percent  worldwide, 
Apple  is  not  a  leading  manufacturer  of  home  computers.  Yet  the 
company  leads  the  computer  industry  and  is  now  a  leader  in  other 

START WITH WHY 
6 
industries   as   well.   Martin   Luther   King's   experiences   were   not 
unique,  yet  he  inspired  a  nation  to  change.  The  Wright  brothers 
were  not  the  strongest  contenders  in  the  race  to  take  the  first 
manned,  powered  flight,  but  they  led  us  into  a  new era  of  aviation 
and, in doing so, completely changed the world we live in. 
Their  goals  were  not  different  than  anyone  else's, and  their  sys-
tems  and  processes  were  easily  replicated.  Yet  the Wright  brothers, 
Apple  and  Martin  Luther  King  stand  out  among  their peers.  They 
stand  apart  from  the  norm  and  their  impact  is  not  easily  copied. 
They  are  members  of  a  very  select  group  of  leaders who  do  some-
thing very, very special. They inspire us. 
Just about every person or organization needs to motivate others 
to act for some reason or another. Some want to motivate a purchase 
decision.  Others  are  looking  for  support  or  a  vote.  Still  others  are 
keen to motivate the people around them to work harder or smarter 
or  just  follow  the  rules.  The  ability  to  motivate  people  is  not,  in 
itself,  difficult.  It  is  usually  tied  to  some  external  factor.  Tempting 
incentives  or  the  threat  of  punishment  will  often  elicit  the  behavior 
we  desire.  General  Motors,  for  example,  so  successfully  motivated 
people to buy their products that they sold more cars than any other 
automaker in the world for over seventy- seven years. Though they 
were leaders in their industry, they did not lead. 
Great leaders, in contrast, are able to inspire people to act. Those 
who are able to inspire give people a sense of purpose or belonging 
that  has  little  to  do  with  any  external  incentive  or  benefit  to  be 
gained. Those who truly lead are able to create a following of people 
who  act  not  because  they  were  swayed,  but  because  they  were 
inspired. For those who are inspired, the motivation to act is deeply 
personal. They are less likely to be swayed by incentives. Those who 
are inspired are willing to pay a premium or endure inconvenience, 
even  personal  suffering.  Those  who  are  able  to  inspire  will  create  a 
following  of  people—supporters,  voters,  customers, workers—who 

WHY STAR WITH WHY 
7 
act for the good  of the  whole not because  they  have to, but because 
they want to. 
Though  relatively  few  in  number,  the  organizations and  leaders 
with  the  natural  ability  to  inspire  us  come  in  all shapes  and  sizes. 
They  can  be  found  in  both  the  public  and  private  sectors.  They  are 
in  all  sorts  of  industries—selling  to  consumers  or to  other  busi-
nesses.  Regardless  of  where  they  exist,  they  all  have  a  dispropor-
tionate  amount  of  influence  in  their  industries.  They  have  the  most 
loyal customers and the most loyal employees. They tend to be more 
profitable  than  others  in  their  industry.  They  are more  innovative, 
and  most  importantly,  they  are  able  to  sustain  all these  things  over 
the long term. Many of them change industries. Some of them even 
change the world. 
The  Wright  brothers,  Apple  and  Dr.  King  are  just  three  exam- 
pies.  Harley-Davidson,  Disney  and  Southwest  Airlines  are  three 
more. John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan were also able to inspire. 
No   matter   from   where   they   hail,   they   all   have   something   in 
common. All the inspiring leaders and companies, regardless of size 
or industry, think, act and communicate exactly alike. 
And it's the complete opposite of everyone else. 
What  if  we  could  all  learn  to  think,  act  and  communicate  like 
those who inspire? I imagine a world in which the ability to inspire 
is  practiced  not  just  by  a  chosen  few,  but  by  the  majority.  Studies 
show that over 80 percent of Americans do not have their dream job. 
If more knew how to build organizations that inspire, we could live 
in a world in which that statistic was the reverse—a world in which 
over 80 percent of people loved their jobs. People who love going to 
work   are   more   productive   and   more   creative.   They   go   home 
happier  and  have  happier  families.  They  treat  their  colleagues  and 
clients  and  customers  better.  Inspired  employees  make  for  stronger 
companies and stronger economies. That is why I wrote this book. I 
hope  to  inspire  others  to  do  the  things  that  inspire  them  so  that 

START WITH WHY 
8 
together  we  may  build  the  companies,  the  economy  and  a  world  in 
which  trust  and  loyalty  are  the  norm  and  not  the  exception.  This 
book is not designed to tell you what to do or how to do it. Its goal 
is not to give you a course of action. Its goal is to offer you the cause 
of action. 
For  those  who  have  an  open  mind  for  new  ideas,  who seek  to 
create  long-lasting  success  and  who  believe  that  your  success  re-
quires  the  aid  of  others,  I  offer  you  a  challenge. From  now  on,  start 
with Why. 
 

ASSUME YOU KNOW 
 
9 
 
 
PART I 
A WORLD THAT 
DOESN'T START 
WITH WHY 
 

START WITH WHY 
10 

 
11 
1 
 
ASSUME YOU KNOW 
On  a  cold  January  day,  a  forty-three-year-old  man  was 
sworn in as the chief executive of his country. By his side 
stood his predecessor, a famous general who, fifteen years 
earlier, had commanded his nation's armed forces in a war 
that resulted in the defeat of Germany. The young leader 
was raised in the Roman Catholic faith. He spent the next 
five  hours  watching  parades  in  his  honor  and  stayed  up 
celebrating until three o'clock in the morning. 
You know who I'm describing, right? 
It's January 30, 1933, and I'm describing Adolf Hitler  and not, as 
most people would assume, John F. Kennedy. 
The point is, we make assumptions. We make assumptions about 
the   world   around   us   based   on   sometimes   incomplete   or   false 
information.  In  this  case,  the  information  I  offered  was  incomplete. 
Many of you were convinced that I was describing John F. Kennedy 
until I added one minor little detail: the date. 
This  is  important  because  our  behavior  is  affected by  our  as-
sumptions  or  our  perceived  truths.  We  make  decisions  based  on 
what  we think  we  know.  It  wasn't  too  long  ago  that  the  majority of 

START WITH WHY 
12 
people  believed  the  world  was  flat.  This  perceived truth  impacted 
behavior.  During  this  period,  there  was  very  little  exploration.  Peo-
ple feared that if they traveled too far they might fall off the edge of 
the  earth.  So  for  the  most  part  they  stayed  put.  It  wasn't  until  that 
minor  detail  was  revealed—the  world  is  round—that  behaviors 
changed on a massive scale. Upon this discovery, societies began to 
traverse  the  planet.  Trade  routes  were  established;  spices  were 
traded. New ideas, like mathematics, were shared between societies 
which  unleashed  all  kinds  of  innovations  and  advancements.  The 
correction  of  a  simple  false  assumption  moved  the  human  race 
forward. 
Now consider how  organizations are formed and how decisions 
are made. Do we really know why some organizations succeed and 
why  others  don't,  or  do  we just  assume?  No  matter  your  definition 
of success—hitting a target stock price, making a certain amount  of 
money,  meeting  a  revenue  or  profit  goal,  getting  a big  promotion, 
starting   your  own  company,  feeding  the  poor,  winning  public 
office—how  we  go  about  achieving  our  goals  is  very similar.  Some 
of us just  wing it, but most of us try to at least gather  some data so 
we  can  make  educated  decisions.  Sometimes  this  gathering  process 
is formal—like conducting polls or market research. And sometimes 
it's  informal,  like  asking  our  friends  and  colleagues  for  advice  or 
looking  back  on  our  own  personal  experience  to  provide  some 
perspective.  Regardless  of  the  process  or  the  goals,  we  all  want  to 
make  educated  decisions.  More  importantly,  we  all  want  to  make 
the right decisions. 
As  we  all  know,  however,  not  all  decisions  work  out  to  be  the 
right  ones,  regardless  of  the  amount  of  data  we  collect.  Sometimes 
the impact of those wrong decisions is minor, and sometimes it can 
be catastrophic. Whatever the result, we  make decisions based on  a 
perception  of  the  world  that  may  not,  in  fact,  be  completely  accu-
rate.  Just  as  so  many  were  certain  that  I  was  describing  John  F. 

ASSUME YOU KNOW 
 
13 
Kennedy at the beginning of this section. You were certain you were 
right.  You  might  even  have  bet  money  on  it—a  behavior  based  on 
an assumption. Certain, that is, until I offered that little detail of the 
date. 
Not  only  bad  decisions  are  made  on  false  assumptions.  Some-
times  when  things  go  right,  we  think  we  know  why,  but  do  we  re-
ally?  That  the  result  went  the  way  you  wanted  does not  mean  you 
can repeat it over and over. I have a friend  who invests some  of his 
own  money.  Whenever  he  does  well,  it's  because  of  his  brains  and 
ability  to  pick  the  right  stocks,  at  least  according  to  him.  But  when 
he  loses  money,  he  always  blames  the  market.  I  have  no  issue  with 
either line of logic, but either his success and failure hinge upon  his 
own  prescience  and  blindness  or  they  hinge  upon  good  and  bad 
luck. But it can't be both. 
So  how  can  we  ensure  that  all  our  decisions  will  yield  the  best 
results  for  reasons  that  are  fully  within  our  control?  Logic  dictates 
that more information and data are key. And that's exactly what we 
do.  We  read  books,  attend  conferences,  listen  to  podcasts  and  ask 
friends and colleagues—all with the purpose of finding out more so 
we can figure out what to do or how to act. The problem is, we've all 
been in situations in which we have all the data and get lots of good 
advice  but  things  still  don't  go  quite  right.  Or  maybe  the  impact 
lasted  for  only  a  short  time,  or  something  happened  that  we  could 
not  foresee.  A  quick  note  to  all  of  you  who  correctly  guessed  Adolf 
Hitler at the beginning of the section: the details I gave are the same 
for both  Hitler and John F. Kennedy,  it could  have been either. You 
have  to  be  careful  what  you  think  you  know.  Asumptions,  you  see, 
even when based on sound research, can lead us astray. 
Intuitively  we  understand  this.  We  understand  that even  with 
mountains  of  data  and  good  advice,  if  things  don't go  as  expected, 
it's  probably  because  we  missed  one,  sometimes  small  but  vital  de-
tail.  In  these  cases,  we  go  back  to  all  our  sources,  maybe  seek  out 

START WITH WHY 
14 
some  new  ones,  and  try  to  figure  out  what  to  do,  and  the  whole 
process  begins  again.  More  data,  however,  doesn't  always  help,  es-
pecially  if  a  flawed  assumption  set  the  whole  process  in  motion  in 
the  first  place.  There  are  other  factors  that  must be  considered,  fac-
tors   that   exist   outside   of   our   rational,   analytical,   information- 
hungry brains. 
There  are  times  in  which  we  had  no  data  or  we  chose  to  ignore 
the  advice  or  information  at  hand  and  just  went  with  our  gut  and 
things  worked  out  just  fine,  sometimes  even  better than  expected. 
This  dance  between  gut  and  rational  decision-making  pretty  much 
covers  how  we  conduct  business  and  even  live  our  lives.  We  can 
continue  to  slice  and  dice  all  the  options  in  every  direction,  but  at 
the  end  of  all  the  good  advice  and  all  the  compelling  evidence, 
we're  left  where  we  started:  how  to  explain  or  decide  a  course  of 
action  that  yields  a  desired  effect  that  is  repeatable.  How  can  we 
have 20/20 foresight? 
There is a wonderful story of a group of American car executives 
who went to Japan to see a Japanese assembly line. At the end of the 
line, the doors were put on the hinges, the  same as in  America. But 
something  was  missing.  In  the  United  States,  a  line  worker  would 
take  a  rubber  mallet  and  tap  the  edges  of  the  door to  ensure  that  it 
fit  perfectly.  In  Japan,  that  job  didn't  seem  to  exist.  Confused,  the 
American  auto  executives  asked  at  what  point  they  made  sure  the 
door  fit  perfectly.  Their  Japanese  guide  looked  at them  and  smiled 
sheepishly.   "We   make   sure   it   fits   when   we   design   it."   In   the 
Japanese   auto   plant,   they   didn't   examine   the   problem   and 
accumulate  data  to  figure  out  the  best  solution—they  engineered 
the outcome they wanted from the beginning. If they didn't achieve 
their desired outcome, they understood it was because of a decision 
they made at the start of the process. 
At  the  end  of  the  day,  the  doors  on  the  American-made  and 
Japanese-made  cars  appeared  to  fit  when  each  rolled  off  the  as-

ASSUME YOU KNOW 
 
15 
sembly line. Except the Japanese didn't  need to employ someone to 
hammer  doors,  nor  did  they  need  to  buy  any  mallets.  More  impor-
tantly,  the  Japanese  doors  are  likely  to  last  longer  and  maybe  even 
be  more  structurally  sound  in  an  accident.  All  this  for  no  other 
reason than they ensured the pieces fit from the start. 
What  the  American  automakers  did  with  their  rubber mallets  is 
a  metaphor  for  how  so  many  people  and  organizations  lead.  When 
faced  with  a  result  that  doesn't  go  according  to  plan,  a  series  of 
perfectly  effective  short-term  tactics  are  used  until  the  desired  out- 
come  is  achieved.  But  how  structurally  sound  are  those  solutions? 
So many organizations function in a world of tangible goals and the 
mallets  to  achieve  them.  The  ones  that  achieve  more,  the  ones  that 
get more out of fewer people and fewer resources, the ones with an 
outsized  amount  of  influence,  however,  build  products  and  com-
panies  and  even  recruit  people  that  all  fit  based  on  the  original 
intention. Even though the outcome may look the same, great lead-
ers understand the value in the things we cannot see. 
Every  instruction  we  give,  every  course  of  action  we  set,  every 
result  we  desire,  starts  with  the  same  thing:  a  decision.  There  are 
those who decide to manipulate the door to fit to achieve the desired 
result and there are those who start from somewhere very different. 
Though both courses of action may yield similar short- term results, 
it   is   what   we   can't   see   that   makes   long-term   success   more 
predictable  for  only  one.  The  one  that  understood  why  the  doors 
need to fit by design and not by default. 
 

 
16 

 
17 
2 
CARROTS AND STICKS 
Manipulation vs. Inspiration 
There's  barely  a  product  or  service  on  the  market  today  that  cus-
tomers can't buy from someone else for about the same price, about 
the same quality, about the same level of service and about the same 
features.  If  you  truly  have  a  first-mover's  advantage,  it's  probably 
lost  in  a  matter  of  months.  If  you  offer  something truly  novel, 
someone else will soon come up with something similar and maybe 
even better. 
But  if  you  ask  most  businesses  why  their  customers are  their 
customers,  most  will  tell  you  it's  because  of  superior  quality,  fea-
tures, price or service. In other words, most companies have no clue 
why   their   customers   are   their   customers.   This   is   a fascinating 
realization.  If  companies  don't  know  why  their  customers  are  their 
customers, odds are good that they don't know why their employees 
are their employees either. 
If  most  companies  don't  really  know  why  their  customers  are 
their  customers  or  why  their  employees  are  their  employees,  then 

START WITH WHY 
18 
how  do  they  know  how  to  attract  more  employees  and encourage 
loyalty  among  those  they  already  have?  The  reality is,  most  busi-
nesses  today  are  making  decisions  based  on  a  set  of  incomplete  or, 
worse,  completely  flawed  assumptions  about  what's  driving  their 
business. 
There  are  only  two  ways  to  influence  human  behavior:  you  can 
manipulate  it  or  you  can  inspire  it.  When  I  mention  manipulation, 
this  is  not  necessarily  pejorative;  it's  a  very  common  and  fairly  be-
nign  tactic.  In  fact,  many  of  us  have  been  doing  it  since  we  were 
young.  "I'll  be  your  best  friend"  is  the  highly  effective  negotiating 
tactic employed by generations of children to obtain something they 
want  from  a  peer.  And  as  any  child  who  has  ever  handed  over 
candy hoping for a new best friend will tell you, it works. 
From  business  to  politics,  manipulations  run  rampant  in  all 
forms of sales and marketing. Typical manipulations include: drop-
ping  the  price;  running  a  promotion;  using  fear,  peer  pressure  or 
aspirational   messages;   and   promising   innovation   to influence 
behavior—be  it  a  purchase,  a  vote  or  support.  When companies  or 
organizations  do  not  have  a  clear  sense  of  why  their  customers  are 
their  customers,  they  tend  to  rely  on  a  disproportionate  number  of 
manipulations  to  get  what  they  need.  And  for  good  reason.  Ma-
nipulations work. 
Price 
Many  companies  are  reluctant  to  play  the  price  game,  but  they  do 
so  because  they  know  it  is  effective.  So  effective,  in  fact,  that  the 
temptation  can  sometimes  be  overwhelming.  There  are  few  profes-
sional services firms that, when faced with an opportunity to land a 
big  piece  of  business,  haven't  just  dropped  their  price  to  make  the 
deal  happen.  No  matter  how  they  rationalized  it  to themselves  or 
their  clients,  price  is  a  highly  effective  manipulation.  Drop  your 
prices  low  enough  and  people  will  buy  from  you.  We see  it  at  the 

CARROTS AND STICKS 
19 
end of a retail season when products are "priced to move." Drop the 
price  low  enough  and  the  shelves  will  very  quickly clear  to  make 
room for the next season's products. 
Playing  the  price  game,  however,  can  come  at  tremendous  cost 
and can create a significant dilemma for the company. For the seller, 
selling based on price is like heroin. The short-term gain is fantastic, 
but the more you do it, the harder it becomes to kick the habit. Once 
buyers get  used to paying  a lower-than-average price for a product 
or  service,  it  is  very  hard  to  get  them  to  pay  more.  And  the  sellers, 
facing  overwhelming  pressure  to  push  prices  lower  and  lower  in 
order to compete, find their margins cut slimmer and slimmer. This 
only  drives  a  need  to  sell  more  to  compensate.  And the  quickest 
way  to  do  that  is  price  again.  And  so  the  downward spiral  of  price 
addiction sets in. In the drug world, these addicts are called junkies. 
In the business world, we  call them commodities. Insurance. Home 
computers.  Mobile  phone  service.  Any  number  of  packaged  goods. 
The  list  of  commodities  created  by  the  price  game  goes  on  and  on. 
In nearly every circumstance, the companies that are forced to treat 
their products as commodities brought it upon themselves. I cannot 
debate  that  dropping  the  price  is  not  a  perfectly  legitimate  way  of 
driving business; the challenge is staying profitable. 
Wal-Mart seems to be an exception to the rule. They have built a 
phenomenally  successful  business  playing  the  price game.  But  it 
also  came  at  a  high  cost.  Scale  helped  Wal-Mart  avoid  the  inherent 
weaknesses  of  a  price  strategy,  but  the  company's  obsession  with 
price above all else has left it scandal-ridden and hurt its reputation. 
And   every   one   of   the   company's   scandals   was   born   from   its 
attempts  to  keep  costs  down  so  it  could  afford  to  offer  such  low 
prices. 
Price  always  costs  something.  The  question  is,  how much  are 
you willing to pay for the money you make? 

START WITH WHY 
20 
Promotions 
General  Motors  had  a  bold  goal.  To  lead  the  American  automotive 
industry in market share. In the 1950s there were four choices of car 
manufacturer  in  the  United  States:  GM,  Ford,  Chrysler  and  AMC. 
Before  foreign  automakers  entered  the  field,  GM  dominated.  New 
competition,   as   one   would   expect,   made   that   goal   harder   to 
maintain. I don't need to provide any data to explain how much has 
changed in the auto industry in fifty years. But General Motors held 
fast  through  most  of  the  last  century  and  maintained  its  prized 
dominance. 
Since 1990, however, Toyota's share of the U.S. market has more 
than  doubled.  By  2007,  Toyota's  share  had  climbed  to  16.3  percent, 
from  only  7.8  percent.  During  the  same  period,  GM  saw  its  U.S. 
market  share  drop  dramatically  from  35  percent  in  1990  to  23.8 
percent  in  2007.  And  in  early  2008,  the  unthinkable  happened:  U.S. 
consumers bought more foreign-made automobiles than ones made 
in America. 
Since  the  1990s,  faced  with  this  onslaught  of  competition  from 
Japan,  GM  and  the  other  U.S.  automakers  have  scrambled  to  offer 
incentives aimed at  helping them  hold on to  their dwindling  share. 
Heavily  promoted  with  advertising,  GM,  for  one,  has  offered  cash- 
back  incentives  of  between  $500  and  $7,000  to  customers  who 
bought  their  cars  and  trucks.  For  a  long  time  the  promotions 
worked brilliantly. GM's sales were on the rise again. 
But  in  the  long  term  the  incentives  only  helped  to dramatically 
erode  GM's  profit  margins  and  put  them  in  a  deep  hole.  In  2007, 
GM  lost  $729  per  vehicle,  in  large  part  due  to  incentives.  Realizing 
that  the  model  was  unsustainable,  GM  announced  it  would  reduce 
the  amount  of  the  cash-back  incentives  it  offered, and  with  that 
reduction,  sales  plummeted.  No  cash,  no  customers. The  auto  in-
dustry  had  effectively  created  cash-back  junkies  out  of  customers, 
building an expectation that there's no such thing as full price. 

CARROTS AND STICKS 
21 
Whether  it  is  "two  for  one"  or  "free  toy  inside,"  promotions  are 
such  common  manipulations  that  we  often  forget  that  we're  being 
manipulated  in  the  first  place.  Next  time  you're  in  the  market  for  a 
digital  camera,  for  example,  pay  attention  to  how  you  make  your 
decision.  You'll  easily  find  two  or  three  cameras  with  the  spec-
ifications you need—size, number of megapixels, comparable price, 
good   brand   name.   But   perhaps   one   has   a   promotion—a free 
carrying  case  or  free  memory  card.  Given  the  relative  parity  of  the 
features  and  benefits,  that  little  something  extra is  sometimes  all  it 
takes   to   tip   the   scale.   In   the   business-to-business   world,   pro- 
motions are called "value added." But the principles are the same— 
give something away for free to reduce the risk so that someone will 
do business with you. And like price, promotions work. 
The  manipulative  nature  of  promotions  is  so  well  established  in 
retail that the industry even named one of the principles. They call it 
breakage.  Breakage  measures  the  percentage  of  customers  who  fail 
to take advantage of a promotion and end up paying full price for a 
product  instead.  This  typically  happens  when  buyers  don't  bother 
performing the necessary steps to claim their rebates, a process pur-
posely  kept  complicated  or  inconvenient  to  increase  the  likelihood 
of mistakes or inaction to keep that breakage number up. 
Rebates  typically  require  the  customer  to  send  in  a  copy  of  a 
receipt, cut out a bar code from the packaging and painstakingly fill 
out  a  rebate  form  with  details  about  the  product  and  how  it  was 
purchased.  Sending  in  the  wrong  part  of  the  box  or leaving  out  a 
detail on the application can delay the rebate for weeks, months, or 
void it altogether. The rebate industry also has a name for the num-
ber  of  customers  who  just  don't  bother  to  apply  for  the  rebate,  or 
who never cash the rebate check they receive. That's called slippage. 
For  businesses,  the  short-term  benefits  of  rebates and  other  ma-
nipulations are clear: a rebate lures customers to pay full price for a 
product  that  they  may  have  considered  buying  only  because  of  the 

START WITH WHY 
22 
prospect  of a partial refund. But nearly 40 percent of  those custom-
ers never get the lower price they thought they were paying. Call it 
a tax on the disorganized, but retailers rely on it. 
Regulators have stepped up their scrutiny of the rebate industry, 
but  with  only  limited  success.  The  rebate  process  remains  cumber-
some  and  that  means  free  money  for  the  seller.  Manipulation  at  its 
best. But at what cost? 
Fear 
If  someone  were  to  hold  up  a  bank  with  a  banana  in his  pocket,  he 
would  be  charged  with  armed  robbery.  Clearly,  no  victim  was  in 
any  danger  of  being  shot,  but  it  is  the  belief  that  the  robber  has  a 
real  gun  that  is  considered  by  the  law.  And  for  good  reason. 
Knowing  full  well  that  fear  will  motivate  them  to  comply  with  his 
demands, the robber took steps to make his victims afraid. Fear, real 
or perceived, is arguably the most powerful manipulation of the lot. 
"No  one  ever  got  fired  for  hiring  IBM,"  goes  the  old  adage,  de-
scribing  a  behavior  completely  borne  out  of  fear.  An  employee  in  a 
procurement department, tasked with finding the best suppliers for 
a  company,  turns  down  a  better  product  at  a  better price  simply 
because  it  is  from  a  smaller  company  or  lesser-known  brand.  Fear, 
real  or  perceived,  that  his  job  would  be  on  the  line  if  something 
went wrong was enough to make him ignore the express purpose of 
his  job,  even  do  something  that  was  not  in  the  company's  best 
interest. 
When fear is employed, facts are incidental. Deeply seated in our 
biological  drive  to  survive,  that  emotion  cannot  be  quickly  wiped 
away  with  facts  and  figures.  This  is  how  terrorism works.  It's  not 
the  statistical  probability  that  one  could  get  hurt  by  a  terrorist,  but 
it's the fear that it might happen that cripples a population. 
A  powerful  manipulator,  fear  is  often  used  with  far  less  nefari-
ous  motivations.  We  use  fear  to  raise  our  kids.  We use  fear  to  mo-

CARROTS AND STICKS 
23 
tivate  people  to  obey  a  code  of  ethics.  Fear  is  regularly  used  in 
public  service  ads,  say  to  promote  child  safety  or AIDS  awareness, 
or the need to wear seat belts. Anyone who was watching television 
in the 1980s got a heavy dose of antidrug advertising, including one 
often-mimicked public service ad from a federal program to combat 
drug  abuse  among  teenagers:  "This  is  your  brain,"  the  man's  voice 
said as he held up a pristine white egg. Then he cracked the egg into 
a  frying  pan  of  spattering  hot  oil.  "This  is  your  brain  on  drug.  Any 
questions?" 
And another ad intended to scare the hell out of any brash teen-
ager: "Cocaine doesn't make you sexy... it makes you dead." 
Likewise,  when  politicians  say  that  their  opponent will  raise 
taxes  or  cut  spending  on  law  enforcement,  or  the  evening  news 
alerts you that your health or security are at risk unless you tune in 
at eleven, both are attempting to seed fear among voters and view-
ers,  respectively.  Businesses  also  use  fear  to  agitate  the  insecurity 
we  all  have  in  order  to  sell  products.  The  idea  is that  if  you  don't 
buy the product or service, something bad could happen to you. 
"Every  thirty-six  seconds,  someone  dies  of  a  heart attack,"  states 
an ad for a local cardiac specialist. "Do you have radon? Your neigh-
bor  does!"  reads  the  ad  on  the  side  of  a  truck  for some  company 
selling  a  home-pollution-inspection  service.  And,  of  course,  the 
insurance industry would like to sell you term life insurance "before 
it's too late." 
If anyone  has ever sold you anything  with a warning to fear the 
consequences if you don't buy it, they are using a proverbial gun to 
your  head  to  help  you  see  the  "value"  of  choosing  them  over  their 
competitor. Or perhaps it's just a banana. But it works. 
Aspirations 
"Quitting  smoking  is  the  easiest  thing  I've  ever  done,"  said  Mark 
Twain. "I've done it hundreds of times." 

START WITH WHY 
24 
If  fear  motivates  us  to  move  away  from  something  horrible, 
aspirational   messages   tempt   us   toward   something   desirable. 
Marketers  often  talk  about  the  importance  of  being aspirational, 
offering someone something they desire to achieve and the ability to 
get there more easily with a particular product or service. "Six steps 
to a happier life." "Work those abs to your dream dress size!" "In six 
short  weeks  you  can  be  rich."  All  these  messages  manipulate.  They 
tempt  us  with  the  things  we  want  to  have  or  to  be  the  person  we 
wish we were. 
Though  positive  in  nature,  aspirational  messages  are  most  ef-
fective  with  those  who  lack  discipline  or  have  a  nagging  fear  or 
insecurity that they don't have the ability to achieve their dreams on 
their own (which, at various times for various reasons, is everyone). 
I  always  joke  that  you  can  get  someone  to  buy  a  gym  membership 
with  an  aspirational  message,  but  to  get  them  to  go  three  days  a 
week  requires  a  bit  of  inspiration.  Someone  who  lives  a  healthy 
lifestyle and is in a habit of exercising does not respond to "six easy 
steps  to  losing  weight."  It's  those  who  don't  have the  lifestyle  that 
are  most  susceptible.  It's  not  news  that  a  lot  of  people  try  diet  after 
diet after diet in an attempt to get the body of their dreams. And no 
matter  the  regime  they  choose,  each  comes  with  the qualification 
that  regular  exercise  and  a  balanced  diet  will  help  boost  results.  In 
other  words,  discipline.  Gym  memberships  tend  to  rise  about  12 
percent  every  January,  as  people  try  to  fulfill  their  New  Year's 
aspiration  to  live  a  healthier  life.  Yet  only  a  fraction  of  those 
aspiring  fitness  buffs  are  still  attending  the  gym by  the  end  of  the 
year.  Aspirational  messages  can  spur  behavior,  but for  most,  it 
won't last. 
Aspirational  messages  are  not  only  effective  in  the  consumer 
market,  they  also  work  quite  well  in  business-to-business  transac-
tions. Managers of companies, big and small, all want to do well, so 
they  make  decisions,  hire  consultants  and  implement  systems  to 

CARROTS AND STICKS 
25 
help  them  achieve  that  desired  outcome.  But  all  too  often,  it  is  not 
the  systems  that  fail  but  the  ability  to  maintain  them.  I  can  speak 
from personal experience here. I've implemented a lot of systems or 
practices  over  the  years  to  help  me  "achieve  the  success  to  which  I 
aspire," only to find myself back to my old habits two weeks later. I 
aspire for a system that will help me avoid implementing systems to 
meet all my aspirations. But I probably wouldn't be able to follow it 
for very long. 
This short-term response to long-term desires is alive and well in 
the  corporate  world  also.  A  management  consultant  friend  of  mine 
was hired by a billion-dollar company to help it fulfill its goals and 
aspirations.  The  problem  was,  she  explained,  no  matter  the  issue, 
the company's managers were always drawn to the quicker, cheaper 
option  over  the  better  long-term  solution.  Just  like  the  habitual 
dieter,  "they  never  have  the  time  or  money  to  do  it  right  the  first 
time,"  she  said  of  her  client,  "but  they  always  have  the  time  and 
money to do it again." 
Peer Pressure 
"Four  out  of  five  dentists  prefer  Trident,"  touts  the  chewing  gum 
advertisement  in  an  attempt  to  get  you  to  try  their  product.  "A 
double-blind  study  conducted  at  a  top  university  concluded  .  .  ." 
pushes  a  late-night  infomercial.  "If  the  product  is  good  enough  for 
professionals,  it's  good  enough  for  you,"  the  advertising  eggs  on. 
"With  over  a  million  satisfied  customers  and  counting,"  teases  an-
other  ad.  These  are  all  forms  of  peer  pressure.  When  marketers 
report  that  a  majority  of  a  population  or  a  group  of  experts  prefers 
their product over another, they are attempting to sway the buyer to 
believing  that  whatever  they  are  selling  is  better.  The  peer  pressure 
works  because  we  believe  that  the  majority  or  the  experts  might 
know  more  than  we  do.  Peer  pressure  works  not  because  the 
majority or the experts are always right, but because we fear that we 
may be wrong. 

START WITH WHY 
26 
Celebrity endorsements are sometimes used to add peer pressure 
to the sales pitch. "If he uses it," we're supposed to think, "it must be 
good."  This  makes  sense  when  we  hear  Tiger  Woods  endorse  Nike 
golf  products  or  Titleist  golf  balls.  (Woods's  deal  with  Nike  is 
actually  credited  for  putting  the  company  on  the  map  in  the  golf 
world.)  But  Tiger  has  also  endorsed  General  Motors cars,  man-
agement  consulting  services,  credit  cards,  food  and  a  Tag  Heuer 
watch  designed  "especially  for  the  golfer."  The  watch,  incidentally, 
can  withstand  a  5,000-g  shock,  a  level  of  shock  more  likely  experi-
enced  by  the  golf  ball  than  the  golfer.  But  Tiger  endorsed  it,  so  it 
must be good. Celebrity endorsements are also used to appeal to our 
aspirations  and  our  desires  to  be  like  them.  The  most  explicit 
example  was  Gatorade's  "I  wanna  be  like  Mike"  campaign,  which 
tempted  youngsters  to  grow  up  and  be  just  like  Michael  Jordan  if 
they  drink  Gatorade.  With  many  other  examples  of  celebrity  en-
dorsements, however, it is harder to see the connection. Sam Water- 
ston of Law & Order fame, for example, sells online trading from TD 
Ameritrade. But for his celebrity, it's uncertain what an actor famed 
for  convicting  homicidal  maniacs  does  for  the  brand.  I  guess  he's 
"trustworthy." 
Impressionable  youth  are  not  the  only  ones  subject to  peer 
pressure.  Most  of  us  have  probably  had  an  experience  of  being 
pressured  by  a  salesman.  Have  you  ever  had  a  sales rep  try  to  sell 
you  some  "office  solution"  by  telling  you  that  70  percent  of  your 
competitors  are  using  their  service,  so  why  aren't you?  But  what  if 
70 percent of your competitors are idiots? Or what if that 70 percent 
were  given  so  much  value  added  or  offered  such  a  low  price  that 
they  couldn't  resist  the  opportunity?  The  practice is  designed  to  do 
one thing and one thing only—to pressure you to buy. To make you 
feel  you  might  be  missing  out  on  something  or  that everyone  else 
knows but you. Better to go with the majority, right? 

CARROTS AND STICKS 
27 
To quote my mother, "If your friends put their head in the oven, 
would  you  do  that  too?"  Sadly,  if  Michael  Jordan  or  Tiger  Woods 
was paid to do just that, it might actually start a trend. 
Novelty (a.k.a. Innovation) 
"In  a  major  innovation  in  design  and  engineering,  [Motorola]  has 
created  a  phone  of  firsts,"  read  a  2004  press  release  that  announced 
the  launch  of  the  mobile  phone  manufacturer's  newest  entry  to  the 
ultracompetitive  mobile phone market. "The combination  of metals, 
such  as  aircraft-grade  aluminum,  with  new  advances,  such  as  an 
internal  antenna  and  a  chemically-etched  keypad,  led  to  the  for-
mation of a device that measures just 13.9mm thin." 
And  it  worked.  Millions  of  people  rushed  to  get  one.  Celebrities 
flashed their RAZRs on the red carpet. Even a prime minister or two 
was  seen  talking  on  one.  Having  sold  over  50  million  units,  few 
could  argue  that  the  RAZR  wasn't  a  huge  success.  "By  surpassing 
current  mobile  expectations,  the  RAZR  represents  Motorola's  his-
tory  of  delivering  revolutionary  innovations,"  said  former  Motorola 
CEO  Ed  Zander  of  his  new  wunder-product,  "while  setting  a  new 
bar for future products coming out of the wireless industry." 
This  one  product  was  a  huge  financial  success  for  Motorola.  This 
was truly an innovation of monumental proportions. 
Or was it? 
Less  than  four  years  later,  Zander  was  forced  out. The  stock 
traded  at  50  percent  of  its  average  value  since  the  launch  of  the 
RAZR, and Motorola's competitors had easily surpassed the RAZR's 
features  and  functionalities  with  equally  innovative  new  phones. 
Motorola   was   once   again   rendered   just   another   mobile   phone 
manufacturer fighting for its piece of the pie. Like so many before it, 
the company confused innovation with novelty. 

START WITH WHY 
28 
Real innovation changes the course of industries or even society. 
The light bulb, the microwave oven, the fax machine, iTunes. These 
are true innovations that changed how we conduct business, altered 
how  we  live  our  lives,  and,  in  the  case  of  iTunes, challenged  an 
industry  to  completely  reevaluate  its  business  model.  Adding  a 
camera  to  a  mobile  phone,  for  example,  is  not  an  innovation—  a 
great  feature,  for  sure,  but  not  industry-altering.  With  this  revised 
definition  in  mind,  even  Motorola's  own  description  of  its  new 
product  becomes  just  a  list  of  a  few  great  features:  a  metal  case, 
hidden  antenna,  flat  keypad  and  a  thin  phone.  Hardly  "revolution-
ary innovation." Motorola had successfully designed the latest shiny 
object  for  people  to  get  excited  about  ...  at  least  until  a  new  shiny 
object  came  out.  And  that's  the  reason  these  features  are  more  a 
novelty  than  an  innovation.  They  are  added  in  an  attempt  to  dif-
ferentiate,  but  not  reinvent.  It's  not  a  bad  thing,  but  it  can't  be 
counted  on  to  add  any  long-term  value.  Novelty  can drive  sales— 
the  RAZR  proved  it—but  the  impact  does  not  last.  If  a  company 
adds too many novel ideas too often, it can have a similar impact on 
the  product  or  category  as  the  price  game.  In  an  attempt  to  dif-
ferentiate  with  more  features,  the  products  start  to  look  and  feel 
more like commodities. And, like price, the need to add yet another 
product to the line to compensate for the commoditization ends in a 
downward spiral. 
In  the  1970s,  there  were  only  two  types  of  Colgate toothpaste. 
But  as  competition  increased,  Colgate's  sales  started  to  slip.  So  the 
company introduced a new product that included a new feature, the 
addition  of  fluoride,  perhaps.  Then  another.  Then  another.  Whit-
ening.  Tartar  control.  Sparkles.  Stripes.  Each  innovation  certainly 
helped  boost  sales,  for  a  while  at  least.  And  so  the  cycle  continued. 
Guess  how  many  different  types  of  toothpaste  Colgate  has  for  you 
to  choose  from  today?  Thirty-two.  Today  there  are  thirty-two  dif-
ferent types of Colgate toothpaste (excluding the four they make for 

CARROTS AND STICKS 
29 
kids).  And  given  how  each  company  responds  to  the  "innovations" 
of the other, that means that Colgate's competitors also sell a similar 
number of variants that offer about the same quality, about the same 
benefits,  at  about  the  same  price.  There  are  literally  dozens  and 
dozens  of  toothpastes  to  choose  from,  yet  there  is no  data  to  show 
that Americans are brushing their teeth more now than they were in 
the  1970s.  Thanks  to  all  this  "innovation,"  it  has become  almost 
impossible  to  know  which  toothpaste  is  right  for  you.  So  much  so 
that  even  Colgate  offers  a  link  on  their  Web  site  called  "Need  Help 
Deciding?"  If  Colgate  needs  to  help  us  pick  one  of their  products 
because  there  are  too  many  variations,  how  are  we  supposed  to 
decide  when  we  go  to  the  supermarket  without  their Web  site  to 
help us? 
Once again, this is an example  of the  newest set of shiny objects 
designed  to  encourage  a  trial  or  a  purchase.  What  companies  clev-
erly  disguise  as  "innovation"  is  in  fact  novelty.  And  it's  not  only 
packaged  goods  that  rely  on  novelty  to  lure  customers;  it's  a  com-
mon  practice  in  other  industries,  too.  It  works,  but  rarely  if  ever 
does the strategy cement any loyal relationships. 
Apple's  iPhone  has  since  replaced  the  Motorola  RAZR  as  the 
popular  must-have  new  mobile  phone.  Removing  all  the  buttons 
and putting a touch screen is not what makes the iPhone innovative, 
however. Those are brilliant new features. But others can copy those 
things  and  it  wouldn't  redefine  the  category.  There  is  something 
else that Apple did that is vastly more significant. 
Apple is not only leading how mobile phones are designed, but, 
in  typical  Apple  fashion,  also  how  the  industry  functions.  In  the 
mobile  phone  industry,  it  is  the  service  provider, not  the  phone 
manufacturer,  that  determines  all  the  features  and benefits  the 
phone  can  offer.  T-Mobile,  Verizon  Wireless,  Sprint,  AT&T  all  dic-
tate  to  Motorola,  Nokia,  Ericsson,  LG  and  others  what  the  phones 
will  do.  Then  Apple  showed  up.  They  announced  that they  would 

START WITH WHY 
30 
tell  the  service  provider  what  the  phone  would  do, not  the  other 
way  around.  AT&T  was  the  only  one  that  agreed,  thus  earning  the 
company  the  exclusive  deal  to  offer  the  new  technology.  That's  the 
kind  of  shift  that  will  impact  the  industry  for  many  years  and  will 
extend  far  beyond  a  few  years  of  stock  boost  for  the  shiny  new 
product. 
Novel, huh? 
The Price You Pay for the Money You Make 
I  cannot  dispute  that  manipulations  work.  Every  one  of  them  can 
indeed  help  influence  behavior  and  every  one  of  them  can  help  a 
company  become  quite  successful.  But  there  are  trade-offs.  Not  a 
single one of them breeds loyalty. Over the course of time, they cost 
more  and  more.  The  gains  are  only  short-term.  And  they  increase 
the  level  of  stress  for  both  the  buyer  and  the  seller.  If  you  have  ex-
ceptionally  deep  pockets  or  are  looking  to  achieve only  a  short- 
term  gain  with  no  consideration  for  the  long  term, then  these 
strategies and tactics are perfect. 
Beyond  the  business  world,  manipulations  are  the  norm  in  pol-
itics  today  as  well.  Just  as  manipulations  can  drive  a  sale  but  not 
create loyalty, so too can they help a candidate get elected, but they 
don't create a foundation for leadership. Leadership requires people 
to stick with you through thick and thin. Leadership is the ability to 
rally  people  not  for  a  single  event,  but  for  years.  In  business, 
leadership  means  that  customers  will  continue  to  support  your 
company  even  when  you  slip  up.  If  manipulation  is  the  only  strat-
egy,  what  happens  the  next  time  a  purchase  decision  is  required? 
What happens after the election is won? 
There  is  a  big  difference  between  repeat  business  and  loyalty. 
Repeat  business  is  when  people  do  business  with  you  multiple 
times.  Loyalty  is  when  people  are  willing  to  turn  down  a  better 
product or a better price to continue doing business with you. Loyal 

CARROTS AND STICKS 
31 
customers  often  don't  even  bother  to  research  the  competition  or 
entertain  other  options.  Loyalty  is  not  easily  won.  Repeat  business, 
however, is. All it takes is more manipulations. 
Manipulative   techniques   have   become   such   a   mainstay   in 
American business today that it has become virtually impossible for 
some  to  kick  the  habit.  Like  any  addiction,  the  drive  is  not  to  get 
sober,  but  to  find  the  next  fix  faster  and  more  frequently.  And  as 
good  as  the  short-term  highs  may  feel,  they  have  a deleterious  im-
pact  on  the  long-term  health  of  an  organization.  Addicted  to  the 
short-term  results,  business  today  has  largely  become  a  series  of 
quick  fixes  added  on  one  after  another  after  another.  The  short- 
term  tactics  have  become  so  sophisticated  that  an  entire  economy 
has developed to service the manipulations, equipped with statistics 
and  quasi-science.  Direct  marketing  companies,  for example,  offer 
calculations  about  which  words  will  get  the  best  results  on  each 
piece of direct mail they send out. 
Those  that  offer  mail-in  rebates  know  the  incentive  works  and 
they  know  that  the  higher  the  rebate,  the  more  effective  it  is.  They 
also  know  the  cost  that  goes  along  with  those  rebates.  To  make 
them  profitable,  manufacturers  rely  on  the  breakage  and  slippage 
numbers staying above a certain threshold. Just like our trusty drug 
addict,  whose  behavior  is  reinforced  by  how  good  the  short-term 
high  feels,  the  temptation  to  make  the  qualifications  of  the  rebate 
more  obscure  or  cumbersome  so  as  to  reduce  the  number  of  qual-
ified applicants can be overwhelming for some. 
Samsung,  the  electronics  giant,  mastered  the  art  of  the  kind  of 
fine  print  that  makes  rebates  so  profitable  for  companies.  In  the 
early  2000s,  the  company  offered  rebates  up  to  $150  on  a  variety  of 
electronic  products,  stipulating  in  the  fine  print that  the  rebate  was 
limited   to   one   per   address—a   requirement   that   would   have 
sounded reasonable enough to anyone at the time. Yet in practice, it 
effectively   disqualified   all   customers   who   lived   in   apartment 

START WITH WHY 
32 
buildings  where  more  than  one  resident  had  applied for  the  same 
rebate.  More  than  4,000 Samsung  customers  lured  by the  cash  back 
received  notices  denying  them  rebates  on  those  grounds.  The  prac-
tice was brought to the attention of the New York attorney general, 
and  in  2004  Samsung  was  ordered  to  pay  $200,000  in rebate  claims 
to  apartment  dwellers.  This  is  an  extreme  case  of  a  company  that 
got caught. But the rebate game of cutting out UPC symbols, filling 
out forms and doing it all before the deadline is alive and well. How 
can  a  company  claim  to  be  customer-focused  when  they  are  so 
comfortable  measuring  the  number  of  customers  who  will  fail  to 
realize any promise of savings? 
Manipulations Lead to Transactions, Not Loyalty 
"It's simple," explains the TV infomercial, "simply put your old gold 
jewelry in the prepaid, insured envelope and we'll send you a check 
for the value of the gold in just two days." Mygoldenvelope .com is 
one of the leaders in this industry, serving as a broker for gold to be 
sent   to   a   refinery,   melted   down,   and   reintroduced   into   the 
commodity market. 
When  Douglas  Feirstein  and  Michael  Moran  started  the  com-
pany,  they  wanted  to  be  the  best  in  the  business.  They  wanted  to 
transform  an  industry  with  the  reputation  of  a  back-alley  pawn 
shop  and  give  it  a  bit  of  a  Tiffany's  sheen.  They  invested  money  in 
making  the  experience  perfect.  They  worked  to  make the  customer 
service  experience  ideal.  They  were  both  successful  entrepreneurs 
and  knew  the  value  of  building  a  brand  and  a  strong  customer 
experience.  They'd  spent  a  lot  of  money  trying  to  get  the  balance 
right,  and  they  made  sure  to  explain  their  difference  in  direct  re-
sponse  advertising  on  various  local  and  national  cable  stations. 
"Better than the similar offers," they'd say. And they were right. But 
the investment didn't pay off as expected. 

CARROTS AND STICKS 
33 
A  few  months  later,  Feirstein  and  Moran  made  a  significant  dis-
covery:  almost  all  of  their  customers  did  business with  them  only 
once.  They  had  a  transactional  business  yet  they  were  trying  to 
make  it  so  much  more  than  that.  So  they  stopped  trying  to  make 
their  service  "better  than  similar  offers,"  and  instead  settled  with 
good.  Given  that  most  people  were  not  going  to  become  repeat 
customers, there weren't going to be any head-to-head comparisons 
made  to  the  other  services.  All  they  needed  to  do  was  drive  a 
purchase  decision  and  offer  a  pleasant  enough  experience  that 
people  would  recommend  it  to  a  friend.  Any  more  was  unneces-
sary.  Once  the  owners  of  mygoldenvelope.com  realized  they  didn't 
need  to  invest  in  the  things  that  build  loyalty  if all  they  wanted  to 
do  was  drive  transactions,  their  business  became  vastly  more  effi-
cient and more profitable. 
For transactions that occur an average of once, carrots and sticks 
are the best way to elicit the desired behavior. When the police offer 
a  reward  they  are  not  looking  to  nurture  a  relationship  with  the 
witness or tipster; it is just a single transaction. When you lose your 
kitten  and  offer  a  reward  to  get  it  back,  you  don't  need  to  have  a 
lasting relationship with the person returning it; you just want your 
cat back. 
Manipulations  are  a  perfectly  valid  strategy  for  driving  a  trans-
action,  or  for  any  behavior  that  is  only  required  once  or  on  rare 
occasions.  The  rewards  the  police  use  are  designed to  incentivize 
witnesses  to  come  forward  to  provide  tips  or  evidence  that  may 
lead  to  an  arrest.  And,  like  any  promotion,  the  manipulation  will 
work if the incentive feels high enough to mitigate the risk. 
In  any  circumstance  in  which  a  person  or  organization  wants 
more  than  a  single  transaction,  however,  if  there  is  a  hope  for  a 
loyal,  lasting  relationship,  manipulations  do  not  help.  Does  a  poli-
tician want your vote, for example, or does he or she want a lifetime 
of support and loyalty from you? (Judging by how elections are run 

START WITH WHY 
34 
these days, it seems all they want is to win elections. Ads discredit-
ing  opponents,  a  focus  on  single  issues,  and  an  uncomfortable  reli-
ance  on  fear  or  aspirational  desires  are  all  indicators.  Those  tactics 
win elections, but they do not seed loyalties among the voters.) 
The American car industry learned the hard way the high cost of 
relying on manipulations to build a business when loyalty was what 
they really needed to nurture. While manipulations may be a viable 
strategy  when  times  are  good  and  money  is  flush,  a change  in 
market  conditions  made  them  too  expensive.  When  the  oil  crisis  of 
2008  hit,  the  auto  industry's  promotions  and  incentives  became 
untenable (the same thing happened in the 1970s). In this case, how 
long the manipulations could produce short-term gains was defined 
by the length of time the economy could sustain the strategy. This is 
a fundamentally weak platform upon which to build a business, an 
assumption of never-ending boom. Though loyal customers are less 
tempted  by  other  offers  and  incentives,  in  good  times  the  free  flow 
of  business  makes  it  hard  to  recognize  their  value.  It's  in  the  tough 
times that loyal customers matter most. 
Manipulations work, but they cost money. Lots of money. When 
the money is not as available to fund those tactics, not having a loyal 
following  really  hurts.  After  September  11,  there  were  customers 
who  sent  checks  to  Southwest  Airlines  to  show  their  support.  One 
note that accompanied a check for $1,000 read, "You've been so good 
to me over the years, in these hard times I wanted to say thank you 
by  helping  you  out."  The  checks  that  Southwest  Airlines  received 
were  certainly  not  enough  to  make  any  significant  impact  on  the 
company's   bottom   line,   but   they   were   symbolic   of   the   feeling 
customers  had  for  the  brand.  They  had  a  sense  of  partnership.  The 
loyal behavior of those who didn't send money is almost impossible 
to  measure,  but  its  impact  has  been  invaluable  over  the  long  term, 
helping  Southwest  to  maintain  its  position  as  the  most  profitable 
airline in history. 

CARROTS AND STICKS 
35 
Knowing you have a loyal customer and employee base not only 
reduces costs, it provides massive peace of mind. Like loyal friends, 
you  know  your  customers  and  employees  will  be  there  for  you 
when  you   need  them  most.  It  is  the  feeling   of  "we're  in  this 
together,"   shared   between   customer   and   company,   voter   and 
candidate, boss and employee, that defines great leaders. 
In  contrast,  relying  on  manipulations  creates  massive  stress  for 
buyer  and  seller  alike.  For  the  buyer,  it  has  become  increasingly 
difficult to know which product, service, brand or company is best. I 
joke about the proliferation of toothpaste varieties and the difficulty 
of  choosing  the  right  one.  But  toothpaste  is just  a  metaphor.  Nearly 
every decision we're asked to make every single day is like choosing 
toothpaste.  Deciding  what  law  firm  to  hire,  college  to  attend,  car  to 
buy,  company  to  work  for,  candidate  to  elect—there are  just  too 
many   choices.   All   the   advertising,   promotions   and   pressure 
employed to tempt us one way or another, each attempting to push 
harder  than  the  other  to  court  us  for  our  money  or our  support, 
ultimately yields one consistent result: stress. 
For  the  companies  too,  whose  obligation  it  is  to  help  us  decide, 
their ability to do so has gotten more and more difficult. Every day, 
the  competition  is  doing  something  new,  something  better.  To  con-
stantly  have  to  come  up  with  a  new  promotion,  a  new  guerrilla 
marketing  tactic,  a  new  feature  to  add,  is  hard  work.  Combined 
with the long-term effects of years of short-term decisions that have 
eroded  profit  margins,  this  raises  stress  levels  inside  organizations 
as well. When manipulations are the norm, no one wins. 
It's  not  an  accident  that  doing  business  today,  and  being  in  the 
workforce  today,  is  more  stressful  than  it  used  to be.  Peter  Why- 
brow, in his book American Mania: When More Is Not Enough, argues 
that many of the ills that we suffer from today have very little to do 
with the bad food we're eating or the partially hydrogenated oils in 
our diet. Rather, Whybrow says, it's the way that corporate America 

START WITH WHY 
36 
has  developed  that  has  increased  our  stress  to  levels  so  high  we're 
literally   making   ourselves   sick   because   of   it.   Americans   are 
suffering   ulcers,   depression,   high   blood   pressure, anxiety,   and 
cancer  at  record  levels.  According  to  Whybrow,  all those  promises 
of more, more, more are actually overloading the reward circuits of 
our  brain.  The  short-term  gains  that  drive  business  in  America 
today are actually destroying our health. 
Just Because It Works Doesn't Make It Right 
The  danger  of  manipulations  is  that  they  work.  And because  ma-
nipulations work, they have become the norm, practiced by the vast 
majority  of  companies  and  organizations,  regardless  of  size  or 
industry. That fact alone creates a systemic peer pressure. With per-
fect  irony,  we,  the  manipulators,  have  been  manipulated  by  our 
own  system.  With  every  price  drop,  promotion,  fear-based  or  aspi-
rational  message,  and  novelty  we  use  to  achieve  our  goals,  we  find 
our  companies,  our  organizations  and  our  systems  getting  weaker 
and weaker. 
The  economic  crisis  that  began  in  2008  is  just  another,  albeit 
extreme,  example  of  what  can  happen  if  a  flawed  assumption  is  al-
lowed  to  carry  on  for  too  long.  The  collapse  of  the  housing  market 
and  the  subsequent  collapse  of  the  banking  industry  were  due  to 
decisions made inside the banks based on a series of manipulations. 
Employees  were  manipulated  with  bonuses  that  encouraged  short-
sighted  decision-making.  Open  shaming  of  anyone  who  spoke  out 
discouraged  responsible  dissent.  A  free  flow  of  loans  encouraged 
aspiring homebuyers to buy more than they could afford at all price 
levels.   There   was   very   little   loyalty.   It   was   all   a   series   of 
transactional  decisions—effective,  but  at  a  high  cost.  Few  were 
working for the good of the whole. Why would they?—there was no 
reason  given  to  do  so.  There  was  no  cause  or  belief  beyond  instant 
gratification.  Bankers  weren't  the  first  to  be  swept  up  by  their  own 

CARROTS AND STICKS 
37 
success.  American  car  manufacturers  have  conducted themselves 
the same way for decades—manipulation after manipulation, short-
term  decision  built  upon  short-term  decision.  Buckling  or  even 
collapse  is  the  only  logical  conclusion  when  manipulations  are  the 
main course of action. 
The reality is, in today's world, manipulations are the norm. 
But there is an alternative. 
 

 
38 

 
39 
 
PART 2 
AN ALTERNATIVE 
PERSPECTIVE 
 

 
40 

 
41 
3 
 
THE GOLDEN CIRCLE 
 
 
There  are  a  few  leaders  who  choose  to  inspire  rather  than  manipu-
late  in  order  to  motivate  people.  Whether  individuals  or  organiza-
tions,  every  single  one  of  these  inspiring  leaders thinks,  acts  and 
communicates exactly the same way. And it's the complete opposite 
of the rest of us. Consciously or not, how they do it is by following a 
naturally occurring pattern that I call The Golden Circle. 
The  concept  of  The  Golden  Circle  was  inspired  by  the  golden 
ratio—a   simple   mathematical   relationship   that   has   fascinated 
mathematicians,    biologists,    architects,    artists,    musicians    and 
naturists  since  the  beginning  of  history.  From  the Egyptians  to 
Pythagoras  to  Leonardo  da  Vinci,  many  have  looked  to  the  golden 
ratio  to  provide  a  mathematical  formula  for  proportion  and  even 
beauty. It also supports the notion that there is more order in nature 

START WITH WHY 
42 
than  we  think,  as  in  the  symmetry  of  leaves  and  the  geometric 
perfection of snowflakes. 
What I found so attractive  about the golden ratio, however, was 
that  it  had  so  many  applications  in  so  many  fields.  And  even  more 
significantly,  it  offered  a  formula  that  could  produce  repeat-  able 
and  predictable  results  in  places  where  such  results  might  have 
been  assumed  to  be  a  random  occurrence  or  luck.  Even  Mother 
Nature—for  most  people  a  symbol  of  unpredictability—exhibited 
more  order  than  we  previously  acknowledged.  Like  the  golden 
ratio,  which  offers  evidence  of  order  in  the  seeming  disorder  of 
nature,  The  Golden  Circle  finds  order  and  predictability  in  human 
behavior.  Put  simply,  it  helps  us  understand  why  we  do  what  we 
do.  The  Golden  Circle  provides  compelling  evidence of  how  much 
more we can achieve if we remind ourselves  to start  everything we 
do by first asking why. 
The   Golden   Circle   is   an   alternative   perspective   to existing 
assumptions   about   why   some   leaders   and   organizations   have 
achieved such a disproportionate degree of influence.  It offers clear 
insight  as  to  how  Apple  is  able  to  innovate  in  so  many  diverse 
industries and never lose its ability to do so. It explains why people 
tattoo  Harley-Davidson  logos  on  their  bodies.  It  provides  a  clearer 
understanding not just of  how Southwest Airlines created the  most 
profitable  airline  in  history,  but  why  the  things  it  did  worked.  It 
even  gives  some  clarity  as  to  why  people  followed  Dr.  Martin  Lu-
ther King Jr. in a movement that changed a nation and why we took 
up John F. Kennedy's challenge to put a man on the moon even after 
he  died.  The  Golden  Circle  shows  how  these  leaders were  able  to 
inspire action instead of manipulating people to act. 
This  alternative  perspective  is  not  just  useful  for  changing  the 
world;  there  are  practical  applications  for  the  ability  to  inspire,  too. 
It  can  be  used  as  a  guide  to  vastly  improving  leadership,  corporate 
culture,  hiring,  product  development,  sales,  and  marketing.  It  even 

THE GOLDEN CIRCLE 
43 
explains  loyalty  and  how  to  create  enough  momentum to  turn  an 
idea into a social movement. 
And it all starts from the inside out. It all starts with Why. 
Before  we  can  explore  its  applications,  let  me  first  define  the 
terms, starting from the outside of the circle and moving inward. 
WHAT:  Every  single  company  and  organization  on  the planet 
knows  WHAT  they  do.  This  is  true  no  matter  how  big or  small,  no 
matter  what  industry.  Everyone  is  easily  able  to  describe  the  prod-
ucts or services a company sells or the job function they have within 
that system. WHATs are easy to identify. 
HOW: Some companies and people know HOW they do WHAT 
they  do.  Whether  you  call  them  a  "differentiating  value  proposi-
tion,"  "proprietary  process"  or  "unique  selling  proposition,"  HOWs 
are often given to explain  how something is different or better. Not 
as  obvious  as  WHATs,  many  think  these  are  the  differentiating  or 
motivating  factors  in  a  decision.  It  would  be  false  to  assume  that's 
all that is required. There is one missing detail: 
WHY: Very few people or companies can clearly articulate WHY 
they  do  WHAT  they  do.  When  I  say  WHY,  I  don't  mean to  make 
money—that's  a  result.  By  WHY  I  mean  what  is  your  purpose, 
cause  or  belief?  WHY  does  your  company  exist?  WHY  do  you  get 
out of bed every morning? And WHY should anyone care? 
When  most  organizations  or  people  think,  act  or  communicate 
they do so from the outside in, from WHAT to WHY. And for good 
reason—they  go  from  clearest  thing  to  the  fuzziest thing.  We  say 
WHAT we do, we sometimes say HOW we do it, but we rarely say 
WHY we do WHAT we do. 
But  not  the  inspired  companies.  Not  the  inspired  leaders.  Every 
single one of them, regardless of their size or their industry, thinks, 
acts and communicates from the inside out. 
I  use  Apple  Inc.  frequently  as  an  example  simply  because  they 
have  broad  recognition  and  their  products  are  easy to  grasp  and 

START WITH WHY 
44 
compare  to  others.  What's  more,  Apple's  success  over  time  is  not 
typical.   Their   ability   to   remain   one   of   the   most   innovative 
companies  year  after  year,  combined  with  their  uncanny  ability  to 
attract   a   cultlike   following,   makes   them   a   great   example   to 
demonstrate many of the principles of The Golden Circle. 
I'll start with a simple marketing example. 
If  Apple  were  like  most  other  companies,  a  marketing  message 
from them would move from the outside in of The Golden Circle. It 
would  start  with  some  statement  of  WHAT  the  company  does  or 
makes,  followed  by  HOW  they  think  they  are  different  or  better 
than the competition, followed by some call to action. With that, the 
company  would  expect  some  behavior  in  return,  in  this  case  a  pur-
chase. A marketing message from Apple, if they were like everyone 
else, might sound like this: 
We make great computers. 
They're beautifully designed, simple to use and user-friendly. 
Wanna buy one? 
It's   not  a  very  compelling  sales  pitch,  but  that's how  most 
companies  sell  to  us.  This  is  the  norm.  First  they start  with  WHAT 
they do-—"Here's our new car." Then they  tell  us  how they do it  or 
how  they  are  better—"It's  got  leather  seats,  great gas  mileage,  and 
great  financing."  And  then  they  make  a  call  to  action  and  expect  a 
behavior. 
You  see  this  pattern  in  business-to-consumer  markets  as  well  as 
business-to-business  environments:  "Here's  our  law firm.  Our  law-
yers  went  to  the  best  schools  and  we  represent  the biggest  clients. 
Hire  us."  This  pattern  is  also  alive  and  well  in  politics—"Here's  the 
candidate,  here  are  her  views  on  taxes  and  immigration.  See  how's 
she's  different?  Vote  for  her."  In  every  case,  the communication  is 
organized  in  an  attempt  to  convince  someone  of  a  difference  or 
superior value. 

THE GOLDEN CIRCLE 
45 
But  that  is  not  what  the  inspiring  leaders  and  organizations  do. 
Every  one  of  them,  regardless  of  size  or  industry, thinks,  acts  and 
communicates from the inside out. 
Let's  look  at  that  Apple  example  again  and  rewrite the  example 
in  the  order  Apple  actually  communicates.  This  time,  the  example 
starts with WHY. 
Everything we do, we believe in challenging the status quo. We 
believe in thinking differently. 
The way we challenge the status quo is by making our products 
beautifully designed, simple to use and user-friendly. 
And we happen to make great computers. 
Wanna buy one? 
It's a completely different message. It actually feels different from 
the first one. We're much more eager to buy a computer from Apple 
after  reading  the  second  version—and  all  I  did  was reverse  the 
order  of  the  information.  There's  no  trickery,  no  manipulation,  no 
free stuff, no aspirational messages, no celebrities. 
Apple  doesn't  simply  reverse  the  order  of  information,  their 
message  starts  with  WHY,  a  purpose,  cause  or  belief  that  has  noth-
ing  to  do  with  WHAT  they  do.  WHAT  they  do—the  products  they 
make, from computers to small electronics—no longer serves as the 
reason  to  buy,  they  serve  as  the  tangible  proof  of their  cause.  The 
design and user interface of Apple products, though important, are 
not  enough  in  themselves  to  generate  such  astounding  loyalty 
among  their  customers.  Those  important  elements  help  make  the 
cause  tangible  and  rational.  Others  can  hire  top  designers  and 
brilliant  engineers  and  make  beautiful,  easy-to-use  products  and 
copy  the  things  Apple  does,  and  they  could  even  steal  away  Apple 
employees  to  do  it,  but  the  results  would  not  be  the  same.  Simply 
copying WHAT Apple does or HOW it does it won't work. There is 
something more, something hard to describe and near impossible to 

START WITH WHY 
46 
copy  that  gives  Apple  such  a  disproportionate  level  of  influence  in 
the  market.  The  example  starts  to  prove  that  people  don't  buy 
WHAT you do, they buy WHY you do it. 
It's  worth  repeating:  people  don't  buy  WHAT  you  do,  they  buy 
WHY you do it. 
Apple's  ability  to  design  such  innovative  products so  consis-  tently 
and  their  ability  to  command  such  astounding  loyalty  for  their 
products   comes   from   more   than   simply   WHAT   they   do. The 
problem  is,  organizations  use  the  tangible  features  and  benefits  to 
build a rational argument for why their company, product or idea is 
better   than   another.   Sometimes   those   comparisons   are   made 
outright  and  sometimes  analogies  or  metaphors  are  drawn,  but  the 
effect  is  the  same.  Companies  try  to  sell  us  WHAT  they  do,  but  we 
buy  WHY  they  do  it.  This  is  what  I  mean  when  1  say they  com-
municate from the outside in; they lead with WHAT and HOW. 
When communicating from the inside  out, however, the WHY is 
offered  as  the  reason  to  buy  and  the  WHATs  serve  as  the  tangible 
proof of that belief. The things we can point to rationalize or explain 
the  reasons  we're  drawn  to  one  product,  company  or idea  over 
another. 
WHAT companies do are external factors, but WHY they do it is 
something  deeper.  In  practical  terms,  there  is  nothing  special  about 
Apple. It is just a company like any other. There is no real difference 
between  Apple  and  any  of  its  competitors—Dell,  HP, Gateway, 
Toshiba.   Pick   one,   it   doesn't   matter.   They   are   all corporate 
structures.  That's  all  a  company  is.  It's  a  structure.  They  all  make 
computers.  They  all  have  some  systems  that  work  and  some  that 
don't.  They  all  have  equal  access  to  the  same  talent,  the  same  re-
sources,  the  same  agencies,  the  same  consultants  and  the  same 
media.  They  all  have  some  good  managers,  some  good designers 
and  smart  engineers.  They  all  make  some  products  that  work  well 
and  some  that  don't.  .  .  even  Apple.  Why,  then,  does  Apple  have 

THE GOLDEN CIRCLE 
47 
such   a   disproportionate   level   of   success?   Why   are   they   more 
innovative?  Why  are  they  consistently  more  profitable?  And  how 
did they manage to build such a cultish loyal following—something 
very few companies are ever able to achieve? 
People  don't  buy  WHAT  you  do,  they  buy  WHY  you  do  it.  This  is 
the reason Apple has earned a remarkable level of flexibility. People 
are  obviously  comfortable  buying  a  computer  from  Apple.  But 
people  are  also  perfectly  comfortable  buying  an  mp3  player  from 
them,  or  a  cell  phone  or  a  DVR.  Consumers  and  investors  are 
completely  at  ease  with  Apple  offering  so  many  different  products 
in  so  many  different  categories.  It's  not  WHAT  Apple  does  that 
distinguishes them. It is WHY they do it. Their products give life to 
their cause. 
I'm  not  so  foolhardy  as  to  propose  that  their  products  don't 
matter;  of  course  they  do.  But  it's  the  reason  they  matter  that  is 
contrary  to  the  conventional  wisdom.  Their  products,  unto  them-
selves, are not the reason Apple is perceived as superior; their prod-
ucts, WHAT Apple  makes, serve as the tangible proof of what they 
believe.  It  is  that  clear  correlation  between  WHAT they  do  and 
WHY  they  do  it  that  makes  Apple  stand  out.  This  is the  reason  we 
perceive  Apple  as  being  authentic.  Everything  they do  works  to 
demonstrate  their  WHY,  to  challenge  the  status  quo.  Regardless  of 
the  products  they  make  or  industry  in  which  they  operate,  it  is 
always clear that Apple "thinks different." 
When  Apple  first  came  out  with  the  Macintosh,  having  an  op-
erating  system  based  on  a  graphical  user  interface and  not  a  com-
plicated  computer  language  challenged  how  computers  worked  at 
the time. What's more, where most technology companies saw their 
biggest  marketing opportunity among businesses, Apple wanted to 
give an individual sitting at home the same power as any company. 
Apple's  WHY,  to  challenge  the  status  quo  and  to  empower  the  in-
dividual,  is  a  pattern  in  that  it  repeats  in  all  they  say  and  do.  It 

START WITH WHY 
48 
comes to life in their iPod and even more so in iTunes, a service that 
challenged the status quo of the music industry's distribution model 
and was better suited to how individuals consumed music. 
The  music  industry  was  organized  to  sell  albums,  a model  that 
evolved  during  a  time  when  listening  to  music  was  largely  an 
activity  we  did  at  home.  Sony  changed  that  in  1979 with  the  intro-
duction  of  the  Walkman.  But  even  the  Walkman,  and  later  the 
Discman,  was  limited  to  the  number  of  cassette  tapes  or  CDs  you 
could  carry  in  addition  to  the  device.  The  development  of  the  mp3 
music  format  changed  all  that.  Digital  compression allowed  for  a 
very  high  quantity  of  songs  to  be  stored  on  relatively  inexpensive 
and highly portable digital music devices. Our ability to walk out of 
the  house  with  only  one  easy-to-carry  device  transformed  music 
into  something  we  largely  listened  to  away  from  home.  And  the 
mp3  not  only  changed  where  we  listened  to  music,  it  also  trans-
formed  us  from  an  album-collecting  culture  to  a  song-collecting 
culture.  While  the  music  industry  was  still  busy  trying  to  sell  us 
albums,  a  model  that  no  longer  suited  consumer  behavior,  Apple 
introduced  their  iPod  by  offering  us  "1,000  songs  in  your  pocket." 
With  the  iPod  and  iTunes,  Apple  did  a  much  better  job  of  com-
municating the value of both the mp3 and the mp3 player relative to 
how  we  lived  our  lives.  Their  advertising  didn't  offer  exhaustive 
descriptions  of  product  details;  it  wasn't  about  them,  it  was  about 
us. And we understood WHY we wanted it. 
Apple  did  not  invent  the  mp3,  nor  did  they  invent  the  technol-
ogy  that  became  the  iPod,  yet  they  are  credited  with  transforming 
the  music  industry  with  it.  The  multigigabyte  portable  hard  drive 
music  player  was  actually  invented  by  Creative  Technology  Ltd.,  a 
Singapore-based  technology  company  that  rose  to  prominence  by 
making  the  Sound  Blaster  audio  technology  that  enables  home  PCs 
to have sound. In fact, Apple didn't introduce the iPod until twenty-
two  months after Creative's entry  into the market. This detail alone 

THE GOLDEN CIRCLE 
49 
calls  into  question  the  assumption  of  a  first  mover's  advantage. 
Given  their  history  in  digital  sound,  Creative  was more  qualified 
than Apple to  introduce a  digital  music product. The  problem was, 
they advertised their product as a "5GB mp3 player." It is exactly the 
same   message   as   Apple's   "1,000   songs   in   your   pocket."   The 
difference  is  Creative  told  us  WHAT  their  product  was  and  Apple 
told us WHY we needed it. 
Only  later,  once  we  decided  we  had  to  have  an  iPod,  did  the 
WHAT  matter—and  we  chose  the  5GB  version,  10GB  version,  and 
so on, the  tangible details that proved we could  get the 1,000 songs 
in  our  pocket.  Our  decision  started  with  WHY,  and  so  did  Apple's 
offering. 
How  many  of  us  can  say  with  certainty  that,  indeed,  an  iPod  is 
actually  better  than  Creative's  Zen?  iPods,  for  example,  are  still 
plagued with battery life and battery replacement issues. They tend 
to just die. Maybe a Zen is better. The reality is, we don't even care if 
it  is.  People  don't  buy  WHAT  you  do,  they  buy  WHY  you  do  it. 
And it is Apple's clarity of WHY that gives them such a remarkable 
ability  to  innovate,  often  competing  against  companies  seemingly 
more  qualified  than  they,  and  succeed  in  industries  outside  their 
core business. 
The  same  cannot  be  said  for  companies  with  a fuz2y  sense  of 
WHY.  When  an  organization  defines  itself  by  WHAT  it  does,  that's 
all  it  will  ever  be  able  to  do.  Apple's  competitors,  having  defined 
themselves by their products or services, regardless  of their "differ-
entiating  value  proposition,"  are  not  afforded  the same  freedom. 
Gateway,   for   example,   started   selling   flat-screen   TVs   in   2003. 
Having  made  flat-screen  monitors  for  years,  they  were  every  bit  as 
qualified  to  make  and  sell  TVs.  But  the  company  failed  to  make  a 
credible  name  for  itself  among  consumer  electronics  brands  and 
gave up the business two years later to focus on its "core business." 
Dell  came  out  with  PDAs  in  2002  and  mp3  players  in 2003,  but 

START WITH WHY 
50 
lasted  only  a  few  years  in  each  market.  Dell  makes good-quality 
products  and  is  fully  qualified  to  produce  these  other  technologies. 
The problem was they  had defined themselves by WHAT they did; 
they made computers, and it simply didn't make sense to us to buy 
a  PDA  or  mp3  player  from  them.  It  didn't  feel  right.  How  many 
people do you think would stand on line for six hours to buy a new 
cell  phone  from  Dell,  as  they  did  for  the  release  of  Apple's  iPhone? 
People   couldn't   see   Dell   as   anything   more   than   a   computer 
company.  It just  didn't  make  sense.  Poor  sales  quickly  ended  Dell's 
desire to enter the small electronic goods market; instead they opted 
to  "focus  on  their  core  business."  Unless  Dell,  like  so  many  others, 
can rediscover their founding purpose, cause or belief and start with 
WHY in all they say and do, all they will ever do is sell computers. 
They will be stuck in their "core business." 
Apple,  unlike  its  competitors,  has  defined  itself  by  WHY  it  does 
things,  not  WHAT  it  does.  It  is  not  a  computer  company,  but  a 
company  that  challenges  the  status  quo  and  offers  individuals  sim-
pler  alternatives.  Apple  even  changed  its  legal  name  in  2007  from 
Apple Computer, Inc. to Apple Inc. to reflect the fact that they were 
more than just a computer company. Practically speaking, it doesn't 
really  matter  what  a  company's  legal  name  is.  For  Apple,  however, 
having the word "Computer" in their name didn't limit WHAT they 
could  do.  It  limited  how  they  thought  of  themselves.  The  change 
wasn't practical, it was philosophical. 
Apple's  WHY  was  formed  at  its  founding  in  the  late 1970s  and 
hasn't changed to this date. Regardless of the products they make or 
the  industries  into  which  they  migrate,  their  WHY  still  remains  a 
constant.  And  Apple's  intention  to  challenge  accepted  thinking  has 
proved  prophetic.  As  a  computer  company  they  redirected  the 
course  of  the  personal  computing  industry.  As  a  small  electronics 
company  they  have  challenged  the  traditional  dominance  of  com-
panies  like  Sony  and  Philips.  As  a  purveyor  of  mobile  phones  they 

THE GOLDEN CIRCLE 
51 
pushed  the  old  hands—Motorola,  Ericsson,  and  Nokia—to  reex-
amine their own businesses. Apple's ability to enter and even dom-
inate  so  many  different  industries  has  even  challenged  what  it 
means  to  be  a  computer  company  in  the  first  place. Regardless  of 
WHAT it does, we know WHY Apple exists. 
The same cannot be said for their competitors. Although they all 
had a clear sense of WHY at some point—it was one of the primary 
factors that helped each of them become billion-dollar companies—
over  the  course  of  time,  all  of  Apple's  competitors  lost  their  WHY. 
Now all those companies define themselves by WHAT they do:  we 
make  computers.  They  turned  from  companies  with  a  cause  into 
companies   that   sold   products.   And   when   that   happens,   price, 
quality,   service   and   features   become   the   primary   currency   to 
motivate  a  purchase  decision.  At  that  point  a  company  and  its 
products  have  ostensibly  become  commodities.  As  any  company 
forced  to  compete  on  price,  quality,  service  or  features  alone  can 
attest, it is very hard to differentiate for any period of time or build 
loyalty  on  those  factors  alone.  Plus  it  costs  money  and  is  stressful 
waking  up  every  day  trying  to  compete  on  that  level  alone.  Know-
ing  WHY  is  essential  for  lasting  success  and  the  ability  to  avoid 
being lumped in with others. 
Any  company  faced  with  the  challenge  of  how  to  differentiate 
themselves  in  their  market  is  basically  a  commodity,  regardless  of 
WHAT  they  do  or  HOW  they  do  it.  Ask  a  milk  producer,  for  ex-
ample,  and  they  will  tell  you  that  there  are  actually  variations 
among  milk  brands.  The  problem  is  you  have  to  be  an  expert  to 
understand  the  differences.  To  the  outside  world,  all  milk  is  basi-
cally the same, so  we just lump all the brands together and call it  a 
commodity. In response, that's how the industry acts. This is largely 
the pattern for almost every other product or service on the market 
today, business-to-consumer or business-to-business. They focus on 
WHAT they do and HOW they do it without consideration of WHY; 

START WITH WHY 
52 
we lump them together and they act like commodities. The more we 
treat  them  like  commodities,  the  more  they  focus  on  WHAT  and 
HOW they do it. It's a vicious cycle. But only companies that act like 
commodities   are   the   ones   who   wake   up   every   day   with   the 
challenge  of  how  to  differentiate.  Companies  and  organizations 
with a clear sense of WHY never worry about it. They don't think of 
themselves   as   being   like   anyone   else   and   they   don't   have   to 
"convince" anyone of their  value. They don't need complex systems 
of  carrots  and  sticks.  They  are  different,  and  everyone  knows  it. 
They start with WHY in everything they say and do. 
There  are  those  who  still  believe  that  Apple's  difference  comes 
from  its  marketing  ability.  Apple  "sells  a  lifestyle,"  marketing  pro-
fessionals  will  tell  you.  Then  how  come  these  marketing  profes-
sionals haven't intentionally repeated Apple's success and longevity 
for  another  company?  Calling  it  a  "lifestyle"  is  a recognition  that 
people who live a certain way choose to incorporate Apple into their 
lives.  Apple  didn't  invent  the  lifestyle,  nor  does it  sell  a  lifestyle. 
Apple  is  simply  one  of  the  brands  that  those  who  live  a  certain 
lifestyle  are  drawn  to.  Those  people  use  certain  products  or  brands 
in  the  course  of  living  in  that  lifestyle;  that  is,  in  part,  how  we 
recognize  their  way  of  life  in  the  first  place.  The  products  they 
choose  become  proof  of  WHY  they  do  the  things  they do.  It  is  only 
because  Apple's  WHY  is  so  clear  that  those  who  believe  what  they 
believe are drawn to them. As Harley-Davidson fits into the lifestyle 
of  a  certain  group  of  people  and  Prada  shoes  fit  the  lifestyle  of 
another group, it is the lifestyle that came first. Like the products the 
company  produces  that  serve  as  proof  of  the  company's  WHY,  so 
too does a brand or product serve as proof of an individual's WHY. 
Others, even some who work for Apple, will say that what truly 
distinguishes  Apple  is  in  fact  the  quality  of  their  products  alone. 
Having  good-quality  products  is  of  course  important.  No  matter 
how  clear  your  WHY,  if  WHAT  you  sell  doesn't  work, the  whole 

THE GOLDEN CIRCLE 
53 
thing   falls   flat.   But   a   company   doesn't   need   to   have   the   best 
products, they just need to be good or very good. Better or best is a 
relative  comparison.  Without  first  understanding  WHY,  the  com-
parison itself is of no value to the decision maker. 
The  concept  of  "better"  begs  the  question:  based  on  what  standard? 
Is a Ferrari F430 sports car better than a Honda Odyssey minivan? It 
depends  why  you  need  the  car.  If  you  have  a  family of  six,  a  two-
seater  Ferrari  is  not  better.  However,  if  you're  looking  for  a  great 
way  to  meet  women,  a  Honda  minivan  is  probably  not better  (de-
pending  on  what  kind  of  woman  you're  looking  to  meet,  I  guess;  I 
too shouldn't make assumptions). Why the product exists must first 
be  considered  and  why  someone  wants  it  must  match. I  could  tell 
you about all the engineering marvels of the Honda Odyssey, some 
of  which  may  actually  be  better  than  a  Ferrari.  It certainly  gets 
better  gas  mileage.  The  odds  are  that  I'm  not  going  to  convince 
someone who really wants that sports car to buy anything else. That 
some  people  are  viscerally  drawn  to  a  Ferrari  more than  a  Honda 
Odyssey  says  more  about  the  person  than  the  engineering  of  the 
product. The engineering, for example, would  simply  be one of the 
tangible points that a Ferrari lover could point out to prove how he 
feels  about  the  car.  The  dogged  defense  of  the  superiority  of  the 
Ferrari  from  the  person  whose  personality  is  predisposed  to  favor 
all  the  features  and  benefits  of  a  Ferrari  cannot  be  an  objective 
conversation.  Why  do  you  think  most  people  who  buy Ferraris  are 
willing  to  pay  a  premium  to  get  it  in  red  whereas  most  who  buy 
Honda Odysseys probably don't care much about the color at all? 
For all those who will try to convince you that Apple computers 
are just better, I cannot dispute a single claim. All I can offer is that 
most  of  the  factors  that  they  believe  make  them  better  meet  their 
standard of what a computer should do. With that in  mind, Macin-
toshes are, in practice, only better for those who believe what Apple 
believes. Those people who share Apple's WHY believe that Apple's 

START WITH WHY 
54 
products  are  objectively  better,  and  any  attempt  to  convince  them 
otherwise  is  pointless.  Even  with  objective  metrics  in  hand,  the 
argument  about  which  is  better  or  which  is  worse  without  first 
establishing  a  common  standard  creates  nothing  more  than  debate. 
Loyalists  for  each  brand  will  point  to  various  features  and  benefits 
that  matter  to  them  (or  don't  matter  to  them)  in  an  attempt  to 
convince the other that they are right. And that's one of the primary 
reasons why so many companies feel the need to differentiate in the 
first  place—based  on  the  flawed  assumption  that  only  one  group 
can  be  right.  But  what  if  both  parties  were  right? What  if  an  Apple 
was  right  for  some  people  and  a  PC  was  right  for  others?  It's  not  a 
debate  about  better  or  worse  anymore,  it's  a  discussion  about 
different  needs.  And  before  the  discussion  can  even  happen,  the 
WHYs for each must be established first. 
A simple claim of better, even with the rational evidence to back 
it  up,  can  create  desire  and  even  motivate  a  decision  to  buy,  but  it 
doesn't create loyalty. If a customer feels inspired to buy a product, 
rather  than  manipulated,  they  will  be  able  to  verbalize  the  reasons 
why  they  think  what  they  bought  is  better.  Good  quality  and  fea-
tures matter, but they are not enough to produce the dogged loyalty 
that  all  the  most  inspiring  leaders  and  companies  are  able  to  com-
mand.  It  is  the  cause  that  is  represented  by  the  company,  brand, 
product or person that inspires loyalty. 
 
Not the Only Way, Just One Way 
Knowing  your  WHY  is  not  the  only  way  to  be  successful,  but  it  is 
the only way to maintain a lasting success and have a greater blend 
of  innovation  and  flexibility.  When  a  WHY  goes  fuzzy,  it  becomes 
much more difficult to maintain the growth, loyalty and inspiration 
that  helped  drive  the  original  success.  By  difficult,  I  mean  that 
manipulation  rather  than  inspiration  fast  becomes  the  strategy  of 

THE GOLDEN CIRCLE 
55 
choice  to  motivate  behavior.  This  is  effective  in  the  short  term  but 
comes at a high cost in the long term. 
Consider  the  classic  business  school  case  of  the  railroads.  In  the 
late  1800s,  the  railroads  were  the  biggest  companies  in  the  country. 
Having  achieved  such   monumental   success,  even  changing  the 
landscape of America, remembering WHY stopped being important 
to them. Instead they became obsessed with WHAT they did— they 
were   in   the   railroad   business.   This   narrowing   of   perspective 
influenced  their  decision-making—they  invested  all their  money  in 
tracks   and   crossties   and   engines.   But   at   the   beginning   of   the 
twentieth  century,  a  new  technology  was  introduced:  the  airplane. 
And  all  those  big  railroad  companies  eventually  went  out  of  busi-
ness.  What  if  they  had  defined  themselves  as  being in  the  mass 
transportation  business?  Perhaps  their  behavior  would  have  been 
different.  Perhaps  they  would  have  seen  opportunities  that  they 
otherwise missed. Perhaps they would own all the airlines today. 
The comparison raises the question of the long-term survivability 
of so many other companies that have defined themselves and their 
industries by WHAT they do. They have been doing it the same way 
for so long that their ability to compete against a new technology or 
see  a  new  perspective  becomes  a  daunting  task.  The story  of  the 
railroads  has  eerie  similarities  to  the  case  of  the  music  industry 
discussed earlier. This is another industry that has  not done a good 
job   of   adjusting   its   business   model   to   fit   a   behavioral   change 
prompted by a new technology. But other industries whose business 
models   evolved   in   a   different   time   show   similar   cracks—   the 
newspaper, publishing and television industries, to  name but three. 
These  are  the  current-day  railroads  that  are  struggling  to  define 
their  value  while  watching  their  customers  turn  to companies  from 
other  industries  to  serve  their  needs.  Perhaps  if  music  companies 
had a clearer sense of WHY, they  would  have seen the opportunity 

START WITH WHY 
56 
to  invent  the  equivalent  of  iTunes  instead  of  leaving  it  to  a  scrappy 
computer company. 
In  all  cases,  going  back  to  the  original  purpose,  cause  or  belief 
will  help  these  industries  adapt.  Instead  of  asking,  "WHAT  should 
we do to compete?" the questions must be asked, "WHY did we start 
doing  WHAT  we're  doing  in  the  first  place,  and  WHAT  can  we  do 
to bring our cause to life considering all the technologies and market 
opportunities available today?" But don't take my word for it. None 
of  this  is  my  opinion.  It  is  all  firmly  grounded  in  the  tenets  of 
biology. 
 

 
57 
4 
 
THIS IS NOT OPINION, THIS IS BIOLOGY 
Now, the Star-Belly Sneetches had bellies with stars. 
The Plain-Belly Sneetches had none upon thars. Those 
stars weren't so big. They were really so small. You 
might think such a thing wouldn't matter at all. 
 
Then, quickly, Sylvester McMonkey McBean 
Put together a very peculiar machine. 
And he said, "You want stars like a Star-Belly Sneetch? 
My friends, you can have them for three dollars each!" 
 

START WITH WHY 
58 
In  his  1961  story  about  the  Sneetches,  Dr.  Seuss  introduced  us  to 
two  groups  of  Sneetches,  one  with  stars  on  their  bellies  and  the 
other  with  none.  The  ones  without  stars  wanted  desperately  to  get 
stars  so  they  could  feel  like  they  fit  in.  They  were  willing  to  go  to 
extreme lengths and pay larger and larger sums of money simply to 
feel  like  they  were  part  of  a  group.  But  only  Sylvester  McMonkey 
McBean,  the  man  whose  machine  puts  "stars  upon  thars,"  profited 
from the Sneetches' desire to fit in. 
As   with   so   many   things,   Dr.   Seuss   explained   it   best.   The 
Sneetches  perfectly  capture  a  very  basic  human  need—the  need  to 
belong.  Our  need  to  belong  is  not  rational,  but  it is  a  constant  that 
exists  across  all  people  in  all  cultures.  It  is  a  feeling  we  get  when 
those around us share our values and beliefs. When we feel like we 
belong we feel connected and we feel safe. As humans we crave the 
feeling and we seek it out. 
Sometimes  our  feeling  of  belonging  is  incidental.  We're  not 
friends  with  everyone  from  our  hometown,  but  travel  across  the 
state,  and  you  may  meet  someone  from  your  hometown and  you 
instantly  have  a  connection  with  them.  We're  not  friends  with  ev-
eryone  from  our  home  state,  but  travel  across  the  country,  and 
you'll feel a special bond with someone you meet who is from your 
home  state.  Go  abroad  and  you'll  form  instant  bonds  with  other 
Americans you meet. I remember a trip I took to Australia. One day 
I  was  on  a  bus  and  heard  an  American  accent.  I  turned  and  struck 
up  a  conversation.  I  immediately  felt  connected  to them,  we  could 
speak the same language, understand the same slang. As a stranger 
in  a  strange  city,  for  that  brief  moment,  I  felt  like  I  belonged,  and 
because  of  it,  I  trusted  those  strangers  on  the  bus  more  than  any 
other  passengers.  In  fact,  we  spent  time  together  later.  No  matter 
where  we  go,  we  trust  those  with  whom  we  are  able  to  perceive 
common values or beliefs. 

THIS IS NOT OPINION, THIS IS BIOLOGY 
59 
Our desire to feel like we belong is so powerful that we will go to 
great lengths, do irrational things and often spend money to get that 
feeling.  Like  the  Sneetches,  we  want  to  be  around  people  and 
organizations   who   are   like   us   and   share   our   beliefs.   When 
companies  talk  about  WHAT  they  do  and  how  advanced their 
products  are,  they  may  have  appeal,  but  they  do  not  necessarily 
represent  something  to  which  we  want  to  belong.  But  when  a 
company  clearly  communicates  their  WHY,  what  they  believe,  and 
we   believe   what   they   believe,   then   we   will   sometimes   go   to 
extraordinary  lengths  to  include  those  products  or brands  in  our 
lives.  This  is  not  because  they  are  better,  but  because  they  become 
markers  or  symbols  of  the  values  and  beliefs  we  hold  dear.  Those 
products  and  brands  make  us  feel  like  we  belong  and  we  feel  a 
kinship  with others who buy the same things. Fan clubs, started by 
customers,  are  often  formed  without  any  help  from  the  company 
itself.  These  people  form  communities,  in  person  or  online,  not  just 
to  share  their  love  of  a  product  with  others,  but  to  be  in  the 
company  of  people  like  them.  Their  decisions  have  nothing  to  do 
with  the  company  or  its  products;  they  have  everything  to  do  with 
the individuals themselves. 
Our  natural  need  to  belong  also  makes  us  good  at  spotting 
things  that  don't  belong.  It's  a  sense  we  get.  A  feeling.  Something 
deep inside us, something we can't put into words, allows us to feel 
how some things just fit and some things just don't. Dell selling mp3 
players   just   doesn't   feel   right   because   Dell   defines   itself   as   a 
computer  company,  so  the  only  things  that  belong  are  computers. 
Apple  defines  itself  as  a  company  on  a  mission  and so  anything 
they  do  that  fits  that  definition  feels  like  it  belongs.  In  2004,  they 
produced  a  promotional  iPod  in  partnership  with  the  iconoclastic 
Irish  rock  band  U2.  That  makes  sense.  They  would  never  have 
produced  a  promotional  iPod  with  Celine  Dion,  even though  she's 
sold  vastly  more  records  than  U2  and  may  have  a  bigger  audience. 

START WITH WHY 
60 
U2  and  Apple  belong  together  because  they  share  the  same  values 
and  beliefs.  They  both  push  boundaries.  It  would  not  have  made 
sense  if  Apple  released  a  special  iPod  with  Celine Dion.  As  big  as 
her audience may be, the partnership just doesn't align. 
Look no farther than Apple's TV commercials "I'm a Mac and I'm 
a PC" for a perfect representation of who a Mac user  needs to be to 
feel  like  they  belong.  In  the  commercial,  the  Mac  user  is  a  young 
guy,  always  in  jeans  and  a  T-shirt,  always  relaxed and  always 
having  a  sense  of  humor  poking  fun  at  "the  system."  The  PC,  as 
defined by Apple, is in a suit. Older. Stodgy. To fit in with Mac, you 
have to be like Mac. Microsoft responded to Apple with its own "I'm 
a   PC"   campaign,   which   depicts   people   from   all   walks   of   life 
identifying  themselves  as  "PC."  Microsoft  included many  more 
people in their ads—teachers, scientists, musicians and children. As 
one would expect from the company that supplies 95 percent of the 
computer  operating  systems,  to  belong  to  that  crowd,  you  have  to 
be  everyone  else.  One  is  not  better  or  worse;  it  depends  on  where 
you  feel  like  you  belong.  Are  you  a  rabble-rouser  or  are  you  with 
the majority? 
We  are  drawn  to  leaders  and  organizations  that  are good  at 
communicating what they believe. Their ability to  make us feel like 
we belong, to make us feel special, safe and not alone is part of what 
gives them the ability to inspire us. Those  whom  we consider great 
leaders  all  have  an  ability  to  draw  us  close  and  to  command  our 
loyalty.  And  we  feel  a  strong  bond  with  those  who  are  also  drawn 
to the same leaders and organizations. Apple users feel a bond with 
each  other.  Harley  riders  are  bonded  to  each  other.  Anyone  who 
was  drawn  to  hear  Dr.  Martin  Luther  King  Jr.  give  his  "I  Have  a 
Dream" speech, regardless of race, religion or sex, stood together in 
that  crowd  as  brothers  and  sisters,  bonded  by  their  shared  values 
and  beliefs.  They  knew  they  belonged  together  because  they  could 
feel it in their gut. 

THIS IS NOT OPINION, THIS IS BIOLOGY 
61 
Gut Decisions Don't Happen in Your Stomach 
The  principles  of  The  Golden  Circle  are  much  more  than  a  com-
munications  hierarchy.  Its  principles  are  deeply  grounded  in  the 
evolution of human behavior. The power of WHY is not opinion, it's 
biology.  If  you  look  at  a  cross  section  of  the  human  brain,  from  the 
top  down,  you  see  that  the  levels  of  The  Golden  Circle  correspond 
precisely with the three major levels of the brain. 
The newest area of the brain, our Homo sapien brain, is the 
 
 
neocortex,  which  corresponds  with  the  WHAT  level.  The  neocortex 
is responsible for rational and analytical thought and language. 
The  middle  two  sections  comprise  the  limbic  brain. The  limbic 
brain  is  responsible  for  all  of  our  feelings,  such as  trust  and  loyalty. 
It  is  also  responsible  for  all  human  behavior  and  all  our  decision-
making, but it has no capacity for language. 
When  we  communicate  from  the  outside  in,  when  we  commu-
nicate WHAT we do first, yes, people can understand vast amounts 
of  complicated  information,  like  facts  and  features,  but  it  does  not 
drive  behavior.  But  when  we  communicate  from  the  inside  out, 
we're  talking  directly  to  the  part  of  the  brain  that  controls  decision-
 

START WITH WHY 
62 
making,  and  our  language  part  of  the  brain  allows  us  to  rationalize 
those decisions. 
The  part  of  the  brain  that  controls  our  feelings  has  no  capacity  for 
language.  It  is  this  disconnection  that  makes  putting  our  feelings 
into  words  so  hard.  We  have  trouble,  for  example,  explaining  why 
we  married  the  person  we  married.  We  struggle  to  put  into  words 
the   real   reasons   why   we   love   them,   so   we   talk   around   it   or 
rationalize  it.  "She's  funny,  she's  smart,"  we  start.  But  there  are  lots 
of funny and smart people in the world, but we don't love them and 
we don't  want  to  marry them. There is obviously more to falling in 
love than just personality and competence. Rationally, we know our 
explanation  isn't  the  real  reason.  It  is  how  our  loved  ones  make  us 
feel,  but  those  feelings  are  really  hard  to  put  into  words.  So  when 
pushed,  we  start  to  talk  around  it.  We  may  even  say  things  that 
don't  make  any  rational  sense.  "She  completes  me," we  might  say, 
for  example.  What  does  that  mean  and  how  do  you  look  for 
someone who does that so you can marry them? That's the problem 
with  love;  we  only  know  when  we've  found  it  because  it  "just  feels 
right." 
The same is true for other decisions. When a decision feels right, 
we  have  a  hard  time  explaining  why  we  did  what  we  did.  Again, 
the  part  of  the  brain  that  controls  decision-making  doesn't  control 
language,  so  we  rationalize.  This  complicates  the  value  of  polls  or 
market  research.  Asking  people  why  they  chose  you  over  another 
may provide wonderful evidence of how they have rationalized the 
decision, but it does not shed much light on the true motivation for 
the  decision.  It's  not  that  people  don't  know,  it's  that  they  have 
trouble explaining why they do what they do. Decision-making and 
the  ability  to  explain  those  decisions  exist  in  different  parts  of  the 
brain. 
This  is  where  "gut  decisions"  come  from.  They  just feel  right. 
There is  no part of the stomach that controls decision-making, it all 

THIS IS NOT OPINION, THIS IS BIOLOGY 
63 
happens  in  the  limbic  brain.  It's  not  an  accident  that  we  use  that 
word  "feel"  to  explain  those  decisions  either.  The reason  gut  deci-
sions  feel  right  is  because  the  part  of  the  brain  that  controls  them 
also  controls  our  feelings.  Whether  you  defer  to  your  gut  or  you're 
simply following  your heart, no matter  which part of the body  you 
think  is  driving  the  decision,  the  reality  is  it's all  in  your  limbic 
brain. 
Our  limbic  brain  is  powerful,  powerful  enough  to  drive  behavior 
that   sometimes   contradicts   our   rational   and   analytical   under-
standing  of  a  situation.  We  often  trust  our  gut  even  if  the  decision 
flies  in  the  face  of  all  the  facts  and  figures.  Richard  Restak,  a  well- 
known  neuroscientist,  talks  about  this  in  his  book The Naked Brain. 
When  you  force  people  to  make  decisions  with  only  the  rational 
part  of  their  brain,  they  almost  invariably  end  up "overthinking." 
These  rational  decisions  tend  to  take  longer  to  make,  says  Restak, 
and  can  often  be  of  lower  quality.  In  contrast,  decisions  made  with 
the  limbic  brain,  gut  decisions,  tend  to  be  faster,  higher-quality 
decisions. This is one of the primary reasons why teachers tell stu-
dents  to  go  with their  first  instinct  when  taking  a  multiple-choice 
test,  to  trust  their  gut.  The  more  time  spent  thinking  about  the 
answer,  the  bigger  the  risk  that  it  may  be  the  wrong  one.  Our 
limbic  brains  are  smart  and  often  know  the  right  thing  to  do.  It  is 
our  inability  to  verbalize  the  reasons  that  may  cause  us  to  doubt 
ourselves  or  trust  the  empirical  evidence  when  our gut  tells  us  not 
to. 
Consider  the  experience  of  buying  a  flat-screen  TV at  your  local 
electronics store. You stand in the aisle listening to an expert explain 
to you the difference between LCD and plasma. The sales rep gives 
you  all  the  rational  differences  and  benefits,  yet you  are  still  none 
the  wiser  as  to  which  one  is  best  for  you.  After  an  hour,  you  still 
have  no  clue.  Your  mind  is  on  overload  because  you're  over- 
thinking the decision. You eventually make a choice and walk out of 

START WITH WHY 
64 
the  store,  still  not  100  percent  convinced  you  chose  the  right  one. 
Then  you  go  to  your  friend's  house  and  see  that  he bought  the 
"other  one."  He  goes  on  and  on  about  how  much  he  loves  his  TV. 
Suddenly  you're  jealous,  even  though  you  still  don't  know  that  his 
is any better than yours. You wonder, "Did I buy the wrong one?" 
Companies that fail  to communicate a sense  of WHY  force us  to 
make decisions with only empirical evidence. This is why those de-
cisions  take  more  time,  feel  difficult  or  leave  us uncertain.  Under 
these  conditions  manipulative  strategies  that  exploit  our  desires, 
fears,  doubts  or  fantasies  work  very  well.  We're  forced  to  make 
these    less-than-inspiring    decisions    for    one    simple reason—
companies don't offer us anything else besides the facts and figures, 
features and benefits upon  which to base our decisions. Companies 
don't tell us WHY. 
People  don't  buy  WHAT  you  do;  they  buy  WHY  you  do  it.  A 
failure to communicate WHY creates nothing but stress or doubt. In 
contrast, many people  who are drawn  to buy Macintosh computers 
or  Harley-Davidson  motorcycles,  for  example,  don't need  to  talk  to 
anyone   about   which   brand   to   choose.   They   feel   the   utmost 
confidence in their decision and the only question they ask is which 
Mac  or  which  Harley.  At  that  level,  the  rational  features  and  bene-
fits, facts and figures absolutely matter, but not to drive the decision 
to  give  money  or  loyalty  to  the  company  or  brand.  That  decision  is 
already  made.  The  tangible  features  are  simply  to  help  direct  the 
choice  of  product  that  best  fits  our  needs.  In  these  cases,  the  deci-
sions  happened  in  the  perfect  inside-out  order.  Those  decisions 
started with WHY—the emotional component of the decision— and 
then  the  rational  components  allowed  the  buyer  to  verbalize  or 
rationalize the reasons for their decision. 
This  is  what  we  mean  when  we  talk  about  winning  hearts  and 
minds. The heart represents the limbic, feeling part of the brain, and 
the  mind is the rational, language center. Most companies are  quite 

THIS IS NOT OPINION, THIS IS BIOLOGY 
65 
adept  at  winning  minds;  all  that  requires  is  a  comparison  of  all  the 
features  and  benefits.  Winning  hearts,  however,  takes  more  work. 
Given  the  evidence  of  the  natural  order  of  decision-making,  I  can't 
help but wonder if the order of the expression "hearts and minds" is 
a coincidence. Why does no one set out to win "minds and hearts"? 
The  ability  to  win  hearts  before  minds  is  not  easy.  It's  a  delicate 
balance   of   art   and   science—another   coincidental   grammatical 
construction.  Why  is  it  that  things  are  not  a  balance  of  science  and 
art,  but  always  art  before  science?  Perhaps  it  is  a  subtle  clue  our 
language-impaired limbic brain is sending us to help us see that the 
art  of  leading  is  about  following  your  heart.  Perhaps  our  brains  are 
trying to tell us that WHY must come first. 
Absent a WHY, a decision is harder to make. And when in doubt 
we  look  to  science,  to  data,  to  guide  decisions.  Companies  will  tell 
you that the reason they start with WHAT they do or HOW they do 
it  is  because  that's  what  their  customers  asked  for.  Quality.  Service. 
Price.  Features.  That's  what  the  data  reported.  But  for  the  fact  that 
the  part  of  the  brain  that  controls  decision-making  is  different  from 
the  part  of  the  brain  that  is  able  to  report  back  that  decision,  it 
would  be  a  perfectly  valid  conclusion  to  give  people  what  they  ask 
for.  Unfortunately,  there  is  more  evidence  that  sales  don't  sig-
nificantly increase and bonds of loyalty are not formed simply when 
companies  say  or  do  everything  their  customers  want.  Henry  Ford 
summed  it  up  best.  "If  I  had  asked  people  what  they  wanted,"  he 
said, "they would have said a faster horse." 
This  is  the  genius  of  great  leadership.  Great  leaders  and  great 
organizations are good at seeing what most of us can't see. They are 
good at giving us things we would never think of asking for. When 
the computer revolution was afoot, computer users couldn't ask for 
a graphical user interface. But that's what Apple gave us. In the face 
of  expanding  competition  in  the  airline  industry,  most  air  travelers 
would never have thought to ask for less instead of more. But that's 

START WITH WHY 
66 
what   Southwest   did.   And   in   the   face   of   hard   times   and 
overwhelming odds, few would have asked their country, what can 
I  do  for  you  over  what  can  you  do  for  me?  The  very cause  upon 
which John F. Kennedy introduced his presidency. Great leaders are 
those  who  trust  their  gut.  They  are  those  who  understand  the  art 
before the science. They win hearts before minds. They are the ones 
who start with WHY. 
We make decisions all day long, and many of them are emotion-
ally  driven.  Rarely  do  we  sift  through  all  the  available  information 
to ensure  we  know every fact. And we don't need  to.  It is all about 
degrees  of  certainty.  "I  can  make  a  decision  with  30  percent  of  the 
information," said former secretary of state Colin Powell. "Anything 
more than 80 percent is too much." There is always a level at which 
we trust ourselves or those around us to guide us, and don't always 
feel  we  need  all  the  facts  and  figures.  And  sometimes  we  just  may 
not trust ourselves to make a certain decision yet. This may explain 
why we feel (there's that word again) so uncomfortable when others 
twist our arm to make a decision that doesn't sit well in our gut. We 
trust our gut to help us decide whom to vote for or which shampoo 
to buy. Because our biology complicates our ability to verbalize the 
real reasons why we make the decisions we do, we rationalize based 
on more tangible factors, like the design or the service or the brand. 
This is the basis for the false assumption that price or  features mat- 
ter  more  than  they  do.  Those  things  matter,  they  provide  us  the 
tangible  things  we  can  point  to  to  rationalize  our decision-making, 
but they don't set the course and they don't inspire behavior. 
It's What You Can't See That Matters 
"Gets  your  whites  whiter  and  your  brights  brighter,"  said  the  TV 
commercial  for  the  newest  laundry  detergent.  This  was  the  value 
proposition  for  so  many  years  in  the  laundry  detergent  business.  A 
perfectly  legitimate  claim.  That's  what  the  market research  revealed 

THIS IS NOT OPINION, THIS IS BIOLOGY 
67 
customers  wanted.  The  data  was  true,  but  the  truth of  what  people 
wanted was different. 
The  makers  of  laundry  detergent  asked  consumers  WHAT  they 
wanted  from  detergent,  and  consumers  said  whiter  whites  and 
brighter  brights.  Not  such  a  remarkable  finding,  if  you  think  about 
it, that people doing laundry wanted their detergent to help get their 
clothes  not  just  clean,  but  very  clean.  So  brands  attempted  to  dif-
ferentiate HOW they got your whites whiter and brights brighter by 
trying  to  convince  consumers  that  one  additive  was more  effective 
than another. Protein, said one brand. Color enhancers, said another. 
No one asked customers WHY they wanted their clothes clean. That 
little nugget wasn't revealed until many years later when a group of 
anthropologists  hired  by  one  of  the  packaged-goods companies 
revealed  that  all  those  additives  weren't  in  fact  driving  behavior. 
They  observed  that  when  people  took  their  washing  out  of  the 
dryer,  no  one  held  it  up  to  the  light  to  see  how  white  it  was  or 
compared it to newer items to see how bright it was.  The first thing 
people  did  when  they  pulled  their  laundry  out  of  the  dryer  was  to 
smell it. This was an amazing discovery. Feeling clean was more im-
portant to people than being clean. There was a presumption that all 
detergents get your clothes clean. That's what detergent is supposed 
to do. But having their clothes smell fresh and clean mattered much 
more   than   the   nuanced   differences   between   which   detergent 
actually made clothes measurably cleaner. 
That  a  false  assumption  swayed  an  entire  industry  to  follow  the 
wrong  direction  is  not  unique  to  detergents.  Cell  phone  companies 
believed  people  wanted  more  options  and  buttons  until  Apple  in-
troduced  its  iPhone  with  fewer  options  and  only  one  button.  The 
German  automakers  believed  their  engineering  alone mattered  to 
American  car  buyers.  They  were  stunned  and  perplexed  when  they 
learned  that  great  engineering  wasn't  enough.  One  by  one,  the 
German luxury car makers begrudgingly added cup holders to their 

START WITH WHY 
68 
fine  automobiles.  It  was  a  feature  that  mattered  a great  deal  to 
commuter-minded  Americans,  but  was  rarely  mentioned  in  any 
research about what factors influenced purchase decisions. I am not, 
for  a  moment,  proposing  that  cup  holders  make  people  loyal  to 
BMWs.  All  I  am  proposing  is  that  even  for  rationally  minded  car 
buyers,   there   is   more   to   decision-making   than   meets   the   eye. 
Literally. 
The  power  of  the  limbic  brain  is  astounding.  It  not  only  controls 
our  gut  decisions,  but  it  can  influence  us  to  do  things  that  seem 
illogical or irrational. Leaving the safety of home to explore faraway 
places.  Crossing  oceans  to  see  what's  on  the  other side.  Leaving  a 
stable job to start a business out of your basement with no money in 
the bank. Many of us look at these decisions and say, "That's stupid, 
you're  crazy.  You  could  lose  everything.  You  could get  yourself 
killed. What are you thinking?" It is  not logic or facts but our hopes 
and dreams, our hearts and our guts, that drive us to try new things. 
If we were all rational, there would be no small businesses, there 
would  be  no  exploration,  there  would  be  very  little  innovation  and 
there  would  be  no  great  leaders  to  inspire  all  those  things.  It  is  the 
undying  belief  in  something  bigger  and  better  that drives  that  kind 
of  behavior.  But  it  can  also  control  behavior  born out  of  other 
emotions,  like  hate  or  fear.  Why  else  would  someone  plot  to  hurt 
someone they had never met? 
The  amount  of  market  research  that  reveals  that  people  want  to 
do  business  with  the  company  that  offers  them  the  best-quality 
products,  with  the  most  features,  the  best  service and  all  at  a  good 
price  is  astounding.  But  consider  the  companies  with  the  greatest 
loyalty—they  rarely  have  all  those  things.  If  you  wanted  to  buy  a 
custom  Harley-Davidson,  you  used  to  wait  six  months  for  delivery 
(to  give  them  credit,  they've  got  it  down  from  a  year).  That's  bad 
service!  Apple's  computers  are  at  least  25  percent more  expensive 
than  a  comparable  PC.  There  is  less  software  available  for  their 

THIS IS NOT OPINION, THIS IS BIOLOGY 
69 
operating system. They have fewer peripherals. The machines them-
selves are sometimes  slower than a comparable PC. If people made 
only  rational  decisions,  and  did  all  the  research  before  making  a 
purchase,  no  one  would  ever  buy  a  Mac.  But  of  course  people  do 
buy Macs. And some don't just buy them—they love them, a feeling 
that comes straight from the heart. Or the limbic brain. 
We  all  know  someone  who  is  a  die-hard  Mac  lover.  Ask  them 
WHY they love their Mac. They won't tell you, "Well, I see myself as 
someone  who  likes  to  challenge  the  status  quo,  and it's  important 
for  me  to  surround  myself  with  the  people,  products  and  brands 
that  prove  to  the  outside  world  who  I  believe  I  am."  Biologically, 
that's what happened. But that decision was made in the part of the 
brain that controls behavior but not language. So they will provide a 
rationalization:  "It's  the  user  interface.  It's  the  simplicity.  It's  the 
design.  It's  the  high  quality.  They're  the  best  computers.  I'm  a 
creative person." In reality, their purchase decision and their loyalty 
are  deeply  personal.  They  don't  really  care  about  Apple;  it's  all 
about them. 
The  same  can  even  be  said  for  the  people  who  love  to  work  at 
Apple.  Even  employees  can't  put  it  into  words.  In  their  case,  their 
job  is  one  of  the  WHATs  to  their  WHY.  They  too  are convinced  it's 
the quality of the products alone that is behind Apple's success. But 
deep  inside,  they  all  love  being  a  part  of  something  bigger  than 
themselves.  The  most  loyal  Apple  employees,  like  the  most  loyal 
Apple  customers,  all  love  a  good  revolution.  A  great  raise  and 
added  benefits  couldn't  convince  a  loyal  Apple  employee  to  work 
for  Dell,  and  no  amount  of  cash-back  incentives  and  rebates  could 
convince  a  loyal  Mac  user  to  switch  to  a  PC  (many  are  already 
paying double the price). This is beyond rational. This is a belief. It's 
no accident that the culture at Apple is often described as a cult. It's 
more than just products, it's a cause to support. It's a matter of faith. 

START WITH WHY 
70 
Remember  the  Honda  and  the  Ferrari?  Products  are  not  just 
symbols  of  what  the  company  believes,  they  also  serve  as  symbols 
of  what  the  loyal  buyers  believe.  People  with  Apple  laptop  com-
puters,  for  example,  love  opening  them  up  while  sitting  in  an  air-
port.  They  like  that  everyone  knows  they  are  using a  Mac.  It's  an 
emblem, a symbol of who they are. That glowing Apple logo speaks 
to something about them and how they see the world. Does anyone 
notice   when   someone   pops   open   the   lid   of   their   HP   or   Dell 
computer?  No!  Not  even  the  people  using  the  computers  care.  HP 
and  Dell  have  a  fuzzy  sense  of  WHY,  so  their  products  and  their 
brands don't symbolize anything about the users. To the Dell or HP 
user, their computer, no matter how fast or sleek, is not a symbol of 
a higher purpose, cause or belief. It's just a computer. In fact, for the 
longest time, the logo on the lid of a Dell computer faced the user so 
when they opened it, it would be upside down for everyone else. 
Products with a clear sense of WHY give people a way to tell the 
outside  world  who  they  are  and  what  they  believe.  Remember, 
people  don't  buy  WHAT  you  do,  they  buy  WHY  you  do  it.  If  a 
company  does  not  have  a  clear  sense  of  WHY  then  it is  impossible 
for  the  outside  world  to  perceive  anything  more  than  WHAT  the 
company does. And when that happens, manipulations that rely on 
pushing  price,  features,  service  or  quality  become the  primary  cur-
rency of differentiation. 
 

 
71 
5 
 
CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY 
 
 
 
 
 
Nature abhors a vacuum. In order to promote life, Mother Nature 
attempts  to  find  balance  whenever  possible.  When  life  is  destroyed 
because of a forest fire, for example, nature will introduce new life to 
replace  it.  The  existence  of  a  food  chain  in  any  ecosystem,  in  which 
each  animal  exists  as  food  for  another,  is  a  way  of  maintaining 
balance.   The   Golden   Circle,   grounded   in   natural   principles   of 
biology, obeys the need for balance as well. As I've discussed, when 
the   WHY   is   absent,   imbalance   is   produced   and   manipulations 
thrive.  And  when  manipulations  thrive,  uncertainty increases  for 
buyers, instability increases for sellers and stress increases for all.
 
Starting with WHY is just the beginning. There is still work to be 
done before a person or an organization earns the right or ability to 
inspire. For The Golden Circle to work, each of the pieces must be in 
balance and in the right order. 
Clarity of WHY 
It all starts with clarity. You have to know WHY you do WHAT you 
do. If people don't buy WHAT you do, they buy WHY you do it, so 
it follows that if you don't know WHY you do WHAT you do, how 
will  anyone  else?  If  the  leader  of  the  organization  can't  clearly  ar-
ticulate  WHY  the  organization  exists  in  terms  beyond  its  products 
or  services,  then  how  does  he  expect  the  employees to  know  WHY 
to  come  to  work?  If  a  politician  can't  articulate  WHY  she  seeks 

START WITH WHY 
72 
public  office  beyond  the  standard  "to  serve  the  people"  (the  mini-
mum  rational  standard  for  all  politicians),  then  how  will  the  voters 
know whom to follow? Manipulations can  motivate the outcome of 
an  election,  but  they  don't  help  choose  who  should lead.  To  lead 
requires those who willingly follow. It requires those who believe in 
something  bigger  than  a  single  issue.  To  inspire  starts  with  the 
clarity of WHY. 
Discipline of HOW 
Once you know WHY you do what you do, the question is HOW 
will you do it? HOWs are your values or principles that guide HOW 
to  bring  your  cause  to  life.  HOW  we  do  things  manifests  in  the 
systems  and  processes  within  an  organization  and  the  culture.  Un-
derstanding HOW you do things and, more importantly, having the 
discipline to hold the organization and all its employees accountable 
to  those  guiding  principles  enhances  an  organization's  ability  to 
work  to  its  natural  strengths.  Understanding  HOW  gives  greater 
ability,   for   example,   to   hire   people   or   find   partners   who   will 
naturally thrive when working with you. 
Ironically,  the  most  important  question  with  the  most  elusive 
answer—WHY  do  you  do  what  you  do?—is  actually  quite  simple 
and  efficient  to  discover  (and  I'll  share  it  in  later  chapters).  It's  the 
discipline   to   never   veer   from   your   cause,   to   hold   yourself 
accountable to  HOW you  do things; that's the  hardest part. Making 
it  even  more  difficult  for  ourselves,  we  remind  ourselves  of  our 
values  by  writing  them  on  the  wall...  as  nouns.  Integrity.  Honesty. 
Innovation.   Communication,   for   example.   But   nouns   are   not 
actionable.  They  are  things.  You  can't  build  systems  or  develop 
incentives around those things. It's nearly impossible to hold people 
accountable to nouns. 

CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY 
73 
"A little more innovation today if you would please, Bob." And if 
you  have  to  write  "honesty"  on  your  wall  to  remind you  to  do  it, 
then you probably have bigger problems anyway. 
For values or guiding principles to be truly effective they have to 
be  verbs.  It's  not  "integrity,"  it's  "always  do  the  right  thing."  It's  not 
"innovation,"  it's  "look  at  the  problem  from  a  different  angle." 
Articulating  our  values  as  verbs  gives  us  a  clear  idea  ...  we  have  a 
clear  idea  of  how  to  act  in  any  situation.  We  can  hold  each  other 
accountable to them measure them or even build incentives around 
them.  Telling  people  to  have  integrity  doesn't  guarantee  that  their 
decisions  will  always  keep  customers'  or  clients'  best  interest  in 
mind; telling them to always do the right thing does. I wonder what 
values Samsung  had written on the wall when  they developed that 
rebate   that   wasn't   applicable   to   people   living   in   apartment 
buildings. 
The  Golden  Circle  offers  an  explanation  for  long-term  success, 
but  the  inherent  nature  of  doing  things  for  the  long  term  often 
includes  investments  or  short-term  costs.  This  is  the  reason  the 
discipline  to  stay  focused  on  the  WHY  and  remain  true  to  your 
values matters so much. 
Consistency of WHAT 
Everything  you  say  and  everything  you  do  has  to  prove  what 
you  believe.  A  WHY  is  just  a  belief.  That's  all  it is.  HOWs  are  the 
actions you take to realize that belief. And WHATs are the results of 
those  actions—everything  you  say  and  do:  your  products,  services, 
marketing,  PR,  culture  and  whom  you  hire.  If  people  don't  buy 
WHAT  you  do  but  WHY  you  do  it,  then  all  these  things  must  be 
consistent.  With  consistency  people  will  see  and  hear,  without  a 
shadow of a doubt, what you believe. After all, we live in a tangible 
world.  The  only  way  people  will  know  what  you  believe  is  by  the 

START WITH WHY 
74 
things you say and do, and if you're not consistent in the things you 
say and do, no one will know what you believe. 
It is at the WHAT level that authenticity happens. "Authenticity" 
is  that  word  so  often  bandied  about  in  the  corporate  and  political 
worlds.  Everyone  talks  about  the  importance  of  being  authentic. 
"You  must  be authentic,"  experts  say.  "All  the  trend  data  shows  that 
people prefer to do business with authentic brands." "People vote for 
the  authentic  candidate."  The  problem  is,  that  instruction  is  totally 
unactionable. 
How  do  you  go  into  somebody's  office  and  say,  "From  now  on, 
please,  a  little  more  authenticity."  "That  marketing  piece  you're 
working  on,"  a  CEO  might  instruct,  "please  make  it a  little  more 
authentic."  What  do  companies  do  to  make  their  marketing  or  their 
sales or whatever they're doing authentic? 
The  common  solution  is  hilarious  to  me.  They  go  out  and  do 
customer research and they ask the customers, what would we have 
to tell you for us to be authentic? This entirely misses the point. You 
can't ask others what you have to do to be authentic. Being authentic 
means that you already know. What does a politician say when told 
to be "more authentic"? How does a leader act more "authentically"? 
Without    a    clear    understanding    of    WHY,    the    instruction    is 
completely useless. 
What authenticity means is that your Golden Circle is in balance. 
It means that everything you say and everything you do you actually 
believe.  This  goes  for  management  as  well  as  the  employees.  Only 
when  that  happens  can  the  things  you  say  and  do  be viewed  as 
authentic.  Apple  believed  that  its  original  Apple  computer  and  its 
Macintosh  challenged  the  dominant  IBM  DOS  platforms.  Apple 
believes its iPod and iTunes products are challenging the status quo 
in  the  music  industry.  And  we  all  understand  WHY  Apple  does 
what  it  does.  It  is  because  of  that  mutual  understanding  that  we 
view   those   Apple   products   as   authentic.   Dell   introduced   mp3 

CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY 
75 
players  and  PDAs  in  an  attempt  to  enter  the  small  electronics 
business.  We  don't  know  what  Dell's  WHY  is,  we  have  no  certainty 
about  what  the  company  believes  or  WHY  it  produced those  prod-
ucts  beyond  self-gain  and  a  desire  to  capitalize  on  a  new  market 
segment. Those products are not authentic. It's not that Dell couldn't 
enter  other  markets—it  certainly  has  the  knowledge and  ability  to 
make   good   products—but   its   ability   to   do   so   without   a   clear 
understanding  of  WHY  is  what  makes  it  much  harder  and  much 
more    expensive.    Just    producing    high-quality    products    and 
marketing  them  does  not  guarantee  success.  Authenticity  cannot  be 
achieved without clarity of WHY. And authenticity matters. 
Ask the best salesmen what it takes to be a great salesman. They 
will  always  tell  you  that  it  helps  when  you  really believe  in  the 
product  you're  selling.  What  does belief  have  to  do  with  a  sales job? 
Simple. When salesmen actually believe in the thing they are selling, 
then  the  words  that  come  out  of  their  mouths  are  authentic.  When 
belief  enters  the  equation,  passion  exudes  from  the  salesman.  It  is 
this  authenticity  that  produces  the  relationships  upon  which  all  the 
best  sales  organizations  are  based.  Relationships  also  build  trust. 
And  with  trust  comes  loyalty.  Absent  a  balanced  Golden  Circle 
means  no  authenticity,  which  means  no  strong  relationships,  which 
means  no  trust.  And  you're  back  at  square  one  selling  on  price, 
service, quality or features. You are back to being like everyone else. 
Worse, without that authenticity, companies resort to manipulation: 
pricing,  promotions,  peer  pressure,  fear,  take  your  pick.  Effective? 
Of course, but only for the short term. 
Being  authentic  is  not  a  requirement  for  success,  but  it  is  if  you 
want  that  success  to  be  a  lasting  success.  Again,  it  goes  back  to 
WHY.  Authenticity  is  when  you  say  and  do  the  things  you  actually 
believe.   But   if   you   don't   know   WHY   the   organization   or   the 
products   exist   on   a   level   beyond   WHAT   you   do,   then it   is 
impossible  to  know  if  the  things  you  say  or  do  are consistent  with 

START WITH WHY 
76 
your  WHY.  Without  WHY,  any  attempt  at  authenticity will  almost 
always be inauthentic. 
The Right Order 
After  you  have  clarity  of  WHY,  are  disciplined  and accountable 
to your own values and guiding principles, and are consistent in all 
you say and do, the final step is to keep it all in the right order. Just 
like  that  little  Apple  marketing  example  I  used  earlier,  simply 
changing the order  of the  information,  starting with  WHY, changed 
the  impact  of  the  message.  The  WHATs  are  important—they  pro-
vide the tangible proof of the WHY—but WHY must come first. The 
WHY provides the context  for everything else. As you will see over 
and  over  in  all  the  cases  and  examples  in  this  book,  whether  in 
leadership,  decision-making  or  communication,  starting  with  WHY 
has  a  profound  and  long-lasting  impact  on  the  result.  Starting  with 
WHY is what inspires people to act. 
If You Don't Know WHY, You Can't Know HOW 
Rollin King, a San Antonio businessman, hatched the idea to take 
what  Pacific  Southwest  was  doing  in  California  and bring  it  to 
Texas—to start an airline that flew short-haul flights between Dallas, 
Houston and San Antonio. He had recently gone through a long and 
messy divorce and turned to the one man he trusted to help him get 
his  idea  off  the  ground.  His  Wild  Turkey-drinking, chain-smoking 
divorce lawyer, Herb Kelleher. 
In  nearly  every  way,  King  and  Kelleher  were  opposites.  King,  a 
numbers  guy,  was  notoriously  gruff  and  awkward,  while  Kelleher 
was  gregarious  and  likable.  At  first  Kelleher  called  King's  idea  a 
dumb  one,  but  by  the  end  of  the  evening  King  had  successfully 
inspired him with his vision and Kelleher agreed to consider coming 
on  board.  It  would  take  four  years,  however,  before  Southwest 

CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY 
77 
Airlines  would  make  its  first  flight  from  Dallas's Love  Field  to 
Houston. 
Southwest did not invent the concept of a low-cost airline. Pacific 
Southwest Airlines pioneered the industry—Southwest even copied 
their  name.  Southwest  had  no  first  mover's  advantage—Braniff  In-
ternational  Airways,  Texas  International  Airlines  and  Continental 
Airlines were already serving the Texas market, and none was eager 
to give up any ground. But Southwest was not built to be an airline. 
It  was  built  to  champion  a cause.  They just  happened  to  use  an  air-
line to do it. 
In  the  early  1970s,  only  15  percent  of  the  traveling  population 
traveled  by  air.  At  that  rate,  the  market  was  small  enough  to  scare 
off  most  would-be  competitors  to  the  big  airlines. But  Southwest 
wasn't  interested  in  competing  against  everyone  else  for  15  percent 
of  the  traveling  population.  Southwest  cared  about the  other  85 
percent. Back then, if you asked Southwest whom their competition 
was, they would have told you, "We compete against the car and the 
bus."   But   what   they   meant   was,   "We're   the   champion for   the 
common  man."  That  was  WHY  they  started  the  airline.  That  was 
their cause, their purpose, their reason for existing. HOW they went 
about  building  their  company  was  not  a  strategy  developed  by  a 
high-priced  management  consultancy.  It  wasn't  a  collection  of  best 
practices   that   they   saw   other   companies   doing.   Their   guiding 
principles  and  values  stemmed  directly  from  their  WHY  and  were 
more common sense than anything else. 
In  the  1970s,  air  travel  was  expensive,  and  if  Southwest  was 
going  to  be  the  champion  for  the  common  man,  they  had  to  be 
cheap.  It  was  an  imperative.  And  in  a  day  and  age  when  air  travel 
was elitist—back then people wore ties on planes—as the champion 
for the common man, Southwest had to be fun. It was an imperative. 
In  a  time  when  air  travel  was  complicated,  with  different  prices 
depending  on  when  you  booked,  Southwest  had  to  be  simple.  If 

START WITH WHY 
78 
they  were  to  be  accessible  to  the  other  85  percent,  then  simplicity 
was an imperative. At the time, Southwest had two price categories: 
nights/weekends and daytime. That was it. 
Cheap,  fun  and  simple.  That's  HOW  they  did  it.  That's  how  they 
were to champion the cause of the common man. The result of their 
actions  was  made  tangible  in  the  things  they  said  and  did—  their 
product,  the  people  they  hired,  their  culture  and  their  marketing. 
"You  are  now  free  to  move  about  the  country,"  they said  in  their 
advertising.  That's  much  more  than  a  tagline.  That's  a  cause.  And 
it's   a   cause   looking   for   followers.   Those   who   could   relate   to 
Southwest,  those  who  saw  themselves  as  average Joes,  now  had  an 
alternative to the big airlines. And those who believed what South- 
west  believed  became  fiercely  loyal  to  the  company.  They  felt 
Southwest  was  a  company  that  spoke  directly  to  them  and  directly 
for  them.  More  importantly,  they  felt  that  flying  Southwest  said 
something  about  who  they  were  as  people.  The  loyalty  that  devel-
oped  with  their  customers  had  nothing  to  do  with  price.  Price  was 
simply one of the ways the airline brought their cause to life. 
Howard  Putnam,  one  of  the  former  presidents  of  Southwest, 
likes  to  tell  a  story  of  a  senior  executive  of  a  large  company  who 
approached  him  after  an  event.  The  executive  said  he  always  flew 
one  of  the  big  airlines  when  he  traveled  on  business.  He  had  to,  it 
was a company mandate.  And although  he had accumulated  many 
frequent  flier  miles  on  the  other  airline  and  money  was  no  object, 
when  he  flew  for  himself  or  with  his  family,  he  always  flew  South-
west.  "He  loves  Southwest,"  Putnam  says  with  a  grin  when  he  tells 
the  story. Just  because  Southwest  is  cheap  doesn't mean  it  only  ap-
peals  to  those  with  less  money.  Cheap  is  just  one  of  the  things 
Southwest does that helps us understand what they believe. 
What Southwest has achieved is the stuff of business folklore. As 
a result of WHY they do what they do, and because they are highly 
disciplined  in  HOW  they  do  it,  they  are  the  most  profitable  airline 

CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY 
79 
in history. There has never been a year that they didn't turn a profit, 
including  after  September  11  and  during  the  oil  crises  of  the  1970s 
and  early  2000s.  Everything  Southwest  says  and  does  is  authentic. 
Everything about them reflects the original cause King and Kelleher 
set out to champion decades earlier. It has never veered. 
Fast-forward  about  thirty  years.  United  Airlines  and  Delta  Air-
lines looked at the success of Southwest and decided they needed a 
low-cost product to compete and share in Southwest's success. "We 
got  to  get  us  one  of  those,"  they  thought.  In  April  2003,  Delta 
launched  their  low-cost  alternative,  Song.  Less  than  a  year  later 
United  launched  Ted.  In  both  cases,  they  copied  HOW  Southwest 
did  it.  They  made  Ted  and  Song  cheap,  fun  and  simple.  And  for 
anyone who ever flew Ted or Song, they were cheap, they were fun 
and they were simple. But both failed. 
United and Delta were both old hands in the airline business and 
were  every  bit  qualified  to  add  whatever  products  they  wanted  to 
adapt to market conditions or seize opportunities. The problem was 
not  with  WHAT  they  did,  the  problem  was,  no  one  knew  WHY 
Song  or  Ted  existed.  They  may  have  even  been  better  than  South-
west.  But  it  didn't  matter.  Sure,  people  flew  them,  but  there  are 
always reasons people do business with you that have nothing to do 
with  you.  That  people  can  be  motivated  to  use  your product  is  not 
the  issue;  the  problem  was  that  too  few  were  loyal to  the  brands. 
Without a sense of WHY, Song and Ted were just another couple of 
airlines. Without a clear sense of WHY, all that people had to judge 
them on was price or convenience. They were commodities that had 
to  rely  on  manipulations  to  build  their  businesses,  an  expensive 
proposition.  United  abandoned  its  entry  into  the  low-cost  airline 
business just four years after it began, and Delta's Song also took its 
last flight only four years after it launched. 
It is a false assumption that differentiation happens in HOW and 
WHAT  you  do.  Simply  offering  a  high-quality  product  with  more 

START WITH WHY 
80 
features or better service or a better price does not create difference. 
Doing  so  guarantees  no  success.  Differentiation  happens  in  WHY 
and  HOW  you  do  it.  Southwest  isn't  the  best  airline  in  the  world. 
Nor  are  they  always  the  cheapest.  They  have  fewer  routes  than 
many of their competition and don't even fly outside the continental 
United States. WHAT they do is not always significantly better. But 
WHY  they  do  it  is  crystal  clear  and  everything  they  do  proves  it. 
There  are  many  ways  to  motivate  people  to  do  things,  but  loyalty 
comes  from  the  ability  to  inspire  people.  Only  when  the  WHY  is 
clear  and  when  people  believe  what  you  believe  can a  true  loyal 
relationship develop. 
Manipulation and Inspiration Are Similar, but Not the Same 
Manipulation    and    inspiration    both    tickle    the    limbic    brain. 
Aspirational  messages,  fear  or  peer  pressure  all  push  us  to  decide 
one way or another by appealing to our irrational desires or playing 
on  our  fears.  But  it's  when  that  emotional  feeling goes  deeper  than 
insecurity  or  uncertainty  or  dreams  that  the  emotional  reaction 
aligns  with  how  we  view  ourselves.  It  is  at  that  point  that  behavior 
moves from being motivated to inspired. When we are inspired, the 
decisions we make have more to do with who we are and less to do 
with the companies or the products we're buying. 
When our decisions feel right, we're willing to pay a premium or 
suffer  an  inconvenience  for  those  products  or  services.  This  has 
nothing  to  do  with  price  or  quality.  Price,  quality,  features  and  ser-
vice are important, but they are the cost of entry in business today. It 
is  those  visceral  limbic  feelings  that  create  loyalty.  And  it  is  that 
loyalty  that  gives  Apple  or  Harley-Davidson  or  Southwest  Airlines 
or  Martin  Luther  King  or  any  other  great  leader  who  commands  a 
following  such  a  huge  advantage.  Without  a  strong  base  of  loyal 
followers,  the  pressure  increases  to  manipulate—to compete  or 

CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY 
81 
"differentiate"  based  on  price,  quality,  service  or  features.  Loyalty, 
real emotional value, exists in the brain of the buyer, not the seller. 
It's  hard  to  make  a  case  to  someone  that  your  products  or  ser-
vices  are  important  in  their  lives  based  on  external  rational  factors 
that you  have  defined  as  valuable  (remember  the  Ferrari  versus  the 
Honda).  However,  if  your  WHYs  and  their  WHY  correspond,  then 
they  will  see  your  products  and  services  as  tangible  ways  to  prove 
what they  believe.  When  WHY,  HOW,  and  WHAT  are  in  balance, 
authenticity is achieved and the buyer feels fulfilled. When they are 
out  of  balance,  stress  or  uncertainty  exists.  When that  happens,  the 
decisions  we  make  will  also  be  out  of  balance.  Without  WHY,  the 
buyer is easily motivated by aspiration or fear. At that point, it is the 
buyer  who  is  at  the  greatest  risk  of  ending  up  being  inauthentic.  If 
they  buy  something  that  doesn't  clearly  embody  their  own  sense  of 
WHY,  then  those  around  them  have  little  evidence  to  paint  a  clear 
and accurate picture of who they are. 
The human animal is a social animal. We're very good at sensing 
subtleties in behavior and judging people accordingly. We get good 
feelings  and  bad  feelings  about  companies,  just  as we  get  good 
feelings  and  bad  feelings  about  people.  There  are  some  people  we 
just feel we can trust and others we just feel we can't. Those feelings 
also manifest  when  organizations try to court us. Our ability to feel 
one way or another toward a person or an organization is the same. 
What  changes  is  who  is  talking  to  us,  but  it  is  always  a  single  indi-
vidual  who  is  listening.  Even  when  a  company  airs  its  message  on 
TV, for example, no matter how many people see the commercial, it 
is always and only an individual that can receive the message. This 
is the value of The Golden Circle; it provides a way to communicate 
consistent with how individuals receive information. For this reason 
an organization must be clear about its purpose, cause or belief and 
make  sure  that  everything  they  say  and  do  is  consistent  with  and 
authentic  to  that  belief.  If  the  levels  of  The  Golden  Circle  are  in 

START WITH WHY 
82 
balance,  all  those  who  share  the  organization's  view  of  the  world 
will be drawn to it and its products like a moth to a light bulb. 
Doing Business Is Like Dating 
I'd  like  to  introduce  you  to  our  imaginary  friend  Brad.  Brad  is 
going  on  a  date  tonight.  It's  a  first  date  and  he's  pretty  excited.  He 
thinks the woman he's about to meet is really beautiful and that she 
makes  a  great  prospect.  Brad  sits  down  for  dinner  and  he  starts 
talking. 
"I am extremely rich." 
"I have a big house and I drive a beautiful car." 
"I know lots of famous people." 
"I'm on TV all the time, which is good because I'm good- 
looking." 
"I've actually done pretty well for myself." 
The question is, does Brad get a second date? 
The way we communicate and the way we behave is all a matter of 
biology.  That  means  we  can  make  some  comparisons  between  the 
things  we  do  in  our  social  lives  and  the  things  we do  in  our 
professional  lives.  After  all,  people  are  people.  To  learn  how  to 
apply.  WHY  to  a  business  situation,  you  needn't  look  much  farther 
than how we act on a date. Because, in reality, there is no difference 
between  sales  and  dating.  In  both  circumstances,  you  sit  across  a 
table  from  someone  and  hope  to  say  enough  of  the  right  things  to 
close  the  deal.  Of  course,  you  could  always  opt  for  a  manipulation 
or  two,  a  fancy  dinner,  dropping  hints  of  tickets  that  you  have  or 
whom  you  know.  Depending  on  how  badly  you  want  to  close  the 
deal, you could tell them anything they want to hear. Promise them 
the world and the odds are good that you will close the deal. Once. 

CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY 
83 
Maybe  twice.  With  time,  however,  maintaining  that  relationship 
will  cost  more  and  more.  No  matter  the  manipulations  you  choose, 
this is not the way to build a trusting relationship. 
In  Brad's  case,  it  is  obvious  that  the  date  did  not  go  well.  The 
odds are not  good that he  will get a  second date, and he's certainly 
not  done  a  good job  of  laying  down  the  foundation  to  build  a  rela-
tionship. Ironically, the woman's initial interest may have been gen-
erated  based  on  those  elements.  She  agreed  to  go  on  the  date 
because her friends told her that Brad was good-looking and that he 
had  a  good  job  and  that  he  knew  a  lot  of  famous  people.  Even 
though  all  those  things  may  be  true,  WHATs  don't  drive  decision-
making,  WHATs  should  be  used  as  proof  of  WHY,  and  the  date 
plainly fell flat. 
Let's  send  Brad  out  again,  but  this  time  he's  going  to  start  with 
WHY. 
"You  know  what  I  love  about  my  life?"  he  starts  this  time.  "I  get 
to wake up every day to do something I love. I get to inspire people 
to  do  the  things  that  inspire  them.  It's  the  most  wonderful  thing  in 
the  world.  In  fact,  the  best  part  is  trying  to  figure  out  all  the  dif-
ferent ways I can do that. It really is amazing. And believe it or not, 
I've actually been able to make a lot of money from it. I bought a big 
house and a nice car. I get to meet lots of famous people and I get to 
be  on  TV  all  the  time,  which  is  fun,  because  I'm  good-  looking.  I'm 
very  lucky  that  I'm  doing  something  that  I  love,  I've  actually  been 
able to do pretty well because of it." 
This time the chances Brad will get a second date, assuming that 
whoever  is  sitting  across  from  him  believes  what  he  believes,  went 
up  exponentially.  More  importantly,  he's  also  laying  a  good  foun-
dation for a relationship, one based on values and beliefs. He said all 
the same things as on the first date; the only difference is he started 
with  WHY,  and  all  the  WHATs,  all  the  tangible  benefits,  served  as 
proof of that WHY. 

START WITH WHY 
84 
Now  consider  how  most  companies  do  business.  Someone  sits 
down across a table from you, they've heard you're a good prospect, 
and they start talking. 
"Our company is extremely successful." 
"We have beautiful offices, you should stop by and check them 
out sometime." 
"We do business with all the biggest companies and brands." 
"I'm sure you've seen our advertising." 
"We're actually doing pretty well." 
In  business,  like  a  bad  date,  many  companies  work  so  hard  to 
prove  their  value  without  saying  WHY  they  exist  in the  first  place. 
You'll  have  to  do  more  than  show  your  resume  before  someone 
finds  you  appealing,  however.  But  that  is  exactly  what  companies 
do.  They  provide  you  with  a  long  list  of  their  experience—WHAT 
they've done, whom they know—all with the idea that you will find 
them  so  desirable  that  you  will  have  to  drop  everything  to  do  busi-
ness with them. 
People are people and the biology of decision-making is the same 
no  matter  whether  it  is  a  personal  decision  or  a  business  decision. 
It's  obvious  that  in  the  dating  scenario  it  was  a  bad  date,  so  why 
would we expect it to be any different in the business scenario? 
Like  on  a  date,  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  start  building  a  trusting 
relationship   with   a   potential   customer   or   client   by   trying   to 
convince them of all the rational features and benefits. Those things 
are important, but they serve only to give credibility to a sales pitch 
and  allow  buyers  to  rationalize  their  purchase  decision.  As  with  all 
decisions,  people  don't  buy  WHAT  you  do,  they  buy  WHY  you  do 
it, and WHAT you do serves as the tangible proof of WHY you do it. 
But  unless  you  start  with  WHY,  all  people  have  to  go  on  are  the 
rational benefits. And chances are you won't get a second date. 
Here's the alternative: 

CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY 
85 
"You  know  what I love about  our company? Every single  one  of 
us  comes  to  work  every  day  to  do  something  we  love.  We  get  to 
inspire people to do the things that inspire them. It's the most won-
derful thing in the world. In fact, the fun part is trying to figure out 
all  the  different  ways  we  can  do  that.  It  really  is  amazing.  The  best 
part is, it is also good for business. We do really well. We have beau-
tiful  offices,  you  should  stop  by  sometime  to  see. We  work  with 
some  of the biggest companies. I'm sure  you've seen  our ads. We're 
actually doing pretty well." 
Now,  how  certain  are  you  that  the  second  pitch  was better  than 
the first? 
Three Degrees of Certainty 
When  we  can  only  provide  a  rational  basis  for  a  decision,  when 
we  can  only  point  to  tangible  elements  or  rational measurements, 
the highest level of confidence we can give is, "I think this is the right 
decision."   That   would   be   biologically   accurate   because   we're 
activating  the  neocortex,  the  "thinking"  part  of  our  brain.  At  a 
neocortical  level  we  can  verbalize  our  thoughts.  This  is  what's  hap-
pening  when  we  spend  all  that  time  sifting  through the  pros  and 
cons,  listening  to  all  the  differences  between  plasma  or  LCD,  Dell 
versus HP. 
When we make gut decisions, the highest level of confidence we 
can offer is, "The decision feels right," even if it flies in the face of all 
the facts and figures. Again, this is biologically accurate, because gut 
decisions happen in the part of the brain that controls our emotions, 
not  language.  Ask  the  most  successful  entrepreneurs  and  leaders 
what  their  secret  is  and  invariably  they  all  say  the  same  thing:  "I 
trust  my  gut."  The  times  things  went  wrong,  they  will  tell  you,  "I 
listened  to  what  others  were  telling  me,  even  though  it  didn't  feel 
right. I  should  have trusted my gut." It's a good strategy, except it's 
not  scalable.  The  gut  decision  can  only  be  made  by a single  person. 

START WITH WHY 
86 
It's   a   perfectly   good   strategy   for   an   individual   or   a   small 
organization, but what happens when success necessitates that more 
people be able to make decisions that feel right? 
That's when the power of WHY can be fully realized. The ability 
to  put  a  WHY  into  words  provides  the  emotional  context  for  deci-
sions.  It  offers  greater  confidence  than  "I  think  it's  right."  It's  more 
scalable  than  "I  feel  it's  right."  When  you  know  your  WHY,  the 
highest level of confidence you can offer is, "I know it's right." When 
you know the decision is right, not only does it feel right, but you can 
also  rationalize  it  and  easily  put  it  into  words.  The  decision  is  fully 
balanced. The rational WHATs offer proof for the feeling of WHY. If 
you can verbalize the feeling that drove the gut decision, if you can 
clearly  state  your  WHY,  you'll  provide  a  clear  context  for  those 
around  you  to  understand  why  that  decision  was  made.  If  the 
decision is consistent with the facts and figures, then those facts and 
figures  serve  to  reinforce  the  decision—this  is  balance.  And  if  the 
decision  flies  in  the  face  of  all  the  facts  and  figures  then  it  will 
highlight  the  other  factors  that  need  to  be  considered.  It  can  turn  a 
controversial decision from a debate into a discussion. 
My former business partner, for example, would get upset when 
I turned away business. I would tell him that a potential client didn't 
"feel" right. That would frustrate him to no end because "the client's 
money  was  as  good  as  everyone  else's,"  he  would  tell  me.  He 
couldn't   understand   the   reason   for   my   decision   and,   worse,   I 
couldn't explain it. It was just a feeling I had. In contrast, these days 
I  can  easily  explain  WHY  I'm  in  business—to  inspire  people  to  do 
the  things  that  inspire  them.  If  I  were  to  make  the  same  decision 
now for the same gut reason, there is no debate because everyone is 
clear  WHY  the  decision  was  made.  We  turn  away  business  because 
those potential clients don't believe what we believe and they are not 
interested  in  anything  to  do  with  inspiring  people.  With  a  clear 
sense  of  WHY,  a  debate  to  take  on  a  bad-fit  client turns  into  a 

CLARITY, DISCIPLINE AND CONSISTENCY 
87 
discussion  of  whether  the  imbalance  is  worth  the  short-term  gain 
they may give us. 
The  goal  of  business  should  not  be  to  do  business  with  anyone 
who simply wants what you have. It should be to focus on the peo-
ple  who  believe  what  you  believe.  When  we  are  selective  about 
doing  business  only  with  those  who  believe  in  our  WHY,  trust 
emerges. 

 
88 

 
89 
 
PART 3 
 
 
LEADERS 
NEED A 
FOLLOWING 
 

 
90 

 
91 
6 
 
THE EMERGENCE OS TRUST 
To  say  that  most  of  the  company's  employees  were  embarrassed 
to  work  there  was  an  understatement.  It  was  no  secret  that  the  em-
ployees felt mistreated. And if a company mistreats their people, just 
watch  how  the  employees  treat  their  customers.  Mud rolls  down  a 
hill,  and  if  you're  the  one  standing  at  the  bottom,  you  get  hit  with 
the   full   brunt.   In   a   company,   that's   usually   the   customer. 
Throughout  the  1980s,  this  was  life  at  Continental Airlines—the 
worst airline in the industry. 
"I could see Continental's biggest problem the second I walked in 
the door in February of 1994," Gordon Bethune wrote in From Worst 
to  First,  the  chief  executive's  firsthand  account   of  Continental's 
turnaround.  "It  was  a  crummy  place  to  work."  Employees  were 

START WITH WHY 
92 
"surly  to  customers,  surly  to  each  other,  and  ashamed  of  their  com-
pany.  And  you  can't  have  a  good  product  without  people  who  like 
coming to work. It just can't be done," he recounts. 
Herb Kelleher, the head of Southwest for twenty years, was con-
sidered  a  heretic  for  positing  the  notion  that  it  is  a  company's  re-
sponsibility  to  look  after  the  employees  first.  Happy  employees 
ensure  happy  customers,  he  said.  And  happy  customers  ensure 
happy shareholders—in that order. Fortunately, Bethune shared this 
heretical belief. 
Some  would  argue  that  the  reason  Continental's  culture  was  so 
poisonous  was  that  the  company  was  struggling.  They  would  tell 
you  that  it's  hard  for  executives  to  focus  on  anything  other  than 
survival when a company is facing hard times. "Once we get profit-
able  again,"  the  logic  went,  "then  we  will  take  a  look  at  everything 
else."  And  without  a  doubt,  throughout  the  1980s  and  early  1990s, 
Continental  struggled.  The  company  filed  for  Chapter  11  bank-
ruptcy  protection  twice  in  eight  years—once  in  1983  and  again  in 
1991—and  managed  to  go  through  ten  CEOs  in  a  decade.  In  1994, 
the  year  Bethune  took  over  as  the  newest  CEO,  the  company  had 
lost  $600  million  and  ranked  last  in  every  measurable  performance 
category. 
But  all  that  didn't  last  long  once  Bethune  arrived.  The  very  next 
year Continental  made $250 million and  was  soon ranked as  one of 
the  best  companies  to  work  for  in  America.  And  while  Bethune 
made  significant  changes  to  improve  the  operations,  the  greatest 
gains  were  in  a  performance  category  that  is  nearly  impossible  to 
measure: trust. 
Trust  does  not  emerge  simply  because  a  seller  makes  a  rational 
case  why  the  customer  should  buy  a  product  or  service,  or  because 
an  executive  promises  change.  Trust  is  not  a  checklist.  Fulfilling  all 
your  responsibilities  does  not  create  trust.  Trust is  a  feeling,  not  a 
rational  experience.  We  trust  some  people  and  companies  even 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
93 
when  things  go  wrong,  and  we  don't  trust  others  even  though  ev-
erything  might  have  gone  exactly  as  it  should  have.  A  completed 
checklist does not guarantee trust. Trust begins to emerge when we 
have a sense that another person or organization is driven by things 
other than their own self-gain. 
With  trust  comes  a  sense  of  value—real  value,  not  just  value 
equated  with  money.  Value,  by  definition,  is  the  transference  of 
trust.  You  can't  convince  someone  you  have  value, just  as  you  can't 
convince  someone  to  trust  you.  You  have  to  earn  trust  by  commu-
nicating  and  demonstrating  that  you  share  the  same values  and 
beliefs. You have to talk about your WHY and prove it with WHAT 
you do. Again, a WHY is just a belief, HOWs are the actions we take 
to  realize  that  belief,  and  WHATs  are  the  results  of  those  actions. 
When  all  three  are  in  balance,  trust  is  built  and  value  is  perceived. 
This is what Bethune was able to do. 
There  are  many  talented  executives  with  the  ability  to  manage 
operations,  but  great  leadership  is  not  based  solely  on  great  opera-
tional ability. Leading is not the same as being the leader. Being the 
leader  means  you  hold  the  highest  rank,  either  by  earning  it,  good 
fortune  or  navigating  internal  politics.  Leading,  however,  means 
that  others  willingly  follow  you—not  because  they  have  to,  not  be-
cause  they  are  paid  to,  but  because  they  want  to.  Frank  Lorenzo, 
CEO  before  Bethune,  may  have  been  the  leader  of  Continental,  but 
Gordon  Bethune  knew  how  to  lead  the  company.  Those who  lead 
are  able  to  do  so  because  those  who  follow  trust  that  the  decisions 
made at the top have the best interest of the group at heart. In turn, 
those  who  trust  work  hard  because  they  feel  like  they  are  working 
for something bigger than themselves. 
Prior  to  Bethune's  arrival,  the  twentieth  floor  of the  company's 
headquarters, the executive floor, was off-limits to most people. The 
executive  suites  were  locked.  Only  those  with  a  rank  of  senior  vice 
president or higher were permitted to visit. Key cards were required 

START WITH WHY 
94 
to  get  onto  the  floor,  security  cameras  were  ubiquitous  and  armed 
guards roamed the floor to eliminate any doubt that the security was 
no  joke.  Clearly,  the  company  suffered  from  trust  issues.  One  story 
handed down was that Frank Lorenzo would not even drink a soda 
on  a  Continental  plane  if  he  didn't  open  the  can  himself.  He  didn't 
trust  anyone,  so  it  is  no  great  leap  of  logic  that no  one  trusted  him. 
It's  hard  to  lead  when  those  whom  you  are  supposed to  be  leading 
are not inclined to follow. 
Bethune  was  very  different.  He  understood  that  beyond  the 
structure  and  systems  a  company  is  nothing  more  than  a  collection 
of  people.  "You  don't  lie  to  your  own  doctor,"  he  says,  "and  you 
can't  lie  to  your  own  employees."  Bethune  set  out  to  change  the 
culture  by  giving  everyone  something  they  could  believe  in.  And 
what, specifically, did he give them to believe in that could turn the 
worst airline in the industry into the best airline in the industry with 
all the same people and all the same equipment? 
In  college  I  had  a  roommate  named  Howard  Jeruchimowitz. 
Now  an  attorney  in  Chicago,  Howard  learned  from  an early  age 
about  a  very  simple  human  desire.  Growing  up  in  the  suburbs  of 
New  York  City,  he  played  outfield  on  the  worst  team  in  the  Little 
League. They lost nearly every game they played—and not by small 
margins  either;  they  were  regularly  annihilated.  Their  coach  was  a 
good  man  and  wanted  to  instill  a  positive  attitude in  the  young 
athletes.  After  one  of  their  more  embarrassing  losses,  the  coach 
pulled the team together and reminded them, "It doesn't matter who 
wins or loses, what matters is how you play the game." It was at this 
point that young Howard raised his hand and asked, "Then why do 
we keep score?" 
Howard  understood  from  a  very  young  age  the  very  human 
desire  to  win.  No  one  likes  to  lose,  and  most  healthy  people  live 
their life to win. The only variation is the score we use. For some it's 
money,  for  others  it's  fame  or  awards.  For  some  it's  power,  love,  a 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
95 
family or spiritual fulfillment. The metric is relative, but the desire is 
the same. A billionaire doesn't need to work. Money becomes a way 
to  keep  score—a  relative  account  of  how  things  are going.  Even  a 
billionaire  who  loses  millions  due  to  poor  decisions  can  get  de-
pressed. Although the money may have zero impact on his lifestyle, 
no one likes to lose. 
The drive to win is not, per se, a bad thing. Problems arise, how-
ever,  when  the  metric  becomes  the  only  measure  of  success,  when 
what you achieve is no longer tied to WHY you set out to achieve it 
in the first place. 
Bethune  set  out  to  prove  to  everyone  at  Continental  that  if  they 
wanted  to  win,  they  could  win.  And  most  of  the  employees  stuck 
around to find out if he was right. There were a few exceptions. One 
executive  who  once  held  up  a  plane  because  he  was  running  late 
was  asked  to  leave,  as  were  thirty-nine  more  of  the  top  sixty 
executives  who  didn't  believe.  No  matter  how  experienced  they 
were  or  what  they  brought  to  the  table,  they  were  asked  to  leave  if 
they weren't team players and weren't able to adapt to the new cul-
ture that Bethune was trying to build. There was no room for those 
who didn't believe in the new Continental. 
Bethune  knew  that  building  a  team  to  go  out  and  win  meant 
more  than  giving  a  few  rah-rah  speeches  and  bonuses  for  the  top 
brass  if  they  hit  certain  revenue  targets.  He  knew that  if  he  wanted 
to  build  a  real,  lasting  success,  people  had  to  win  not  for  him,  not 
for  the  shareholders  and  not  even  for  the  customer.  For  the  success 
to   last   the   employees   of   Continental   had   to   want   to   win   for 
themselves. 
Everything  he talked about was in terms of how  it benefited the 
employees. Instead of telling them to keep the planes clean for cus-
tomers,  he  pointed  out  something  more  obvious.  Every  day  they 
came  to  work  on  a  plane.  The  passengers  left  after their  flight,  but 

START WITH WHY 
96 
many  of  the  flight  attendants  had  to  stay  on  for  at  least  one  more 
trip. It's just nicer to come to work when the environment is cleaner. 
Bethune also got rid of all the security on the twentieth floor. He 
instituted   an   open-door   policy   and   made   himself   incredibly 
accessible.  It  was  common  for  him  to  show  up  and  sling  bags  with 
some of the baggage handlers at the airport. From now on, this was 
a family and everyone had to work together. 
Bethune focused on the things they knew to be important, and to an 
airline the most important thing is to get the planes running on time. 
In  the  early  1990s,  before  Bethune  arrived,  Continental  had  the 
lowest on-time rating of the nation's ten largest airlines. So Bethune 
told  employees  that  each  month  Continental's  on-time  percentage 
ranked  in  the  top  five,  every  employee  would  receive  a  check  for 
$65.  When  you  consider  that  Continental  had  40,000 employees  in 
1995, every on-time month cost the airline a whopping $2.5 million, 
But Bethune knew  he was getting a deal: being chronically late was 
costing  it  $5  million  a  month  in  expenses  like  missed  connections 
and   putting   passengers   up   overnight.   But   most   important   to 
Bethune   was  what  the  bonus  program  did  for  the  com-  pany 
culture:  it  got  tens  of  thousands  of  employees,  including  managers, 
all pointed in the same direction for the first time in years. 
Gone  were  the  days  when  only  the  brass  would  enjoy the  ben-
efits of success. Everyone got their $65 when the airline did well and 
no  one  got  it  when  the  airline  missed  its  targets. Bethune  even 
insisted  that  a  separate  check  be  sent  out.  It  wasn't  just  added  to 
their salary check. This was different. This was a symbol of winning. 
And  on  every  check  a  message  reminded  them  WHY  they  came  to 
work: "Thank you for helping make Continental one of the best." 
"We  measured  things  the  employees  could  truly  control,"  Be-
thune  said.  "We  made  the  stakes  something  the  employees  would 
win or lose on together, not separately." 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
97 
Everything   they   did   made   people   feel   like   they   were   in   it 
together. And they were. 
The Only Difference Between You and a 
Caveman Is the Car You Drive 
 
The reason the human race has been so successful is not because 
we're  the  strongest  animals—far  from  it.  Size  and  might  alone  do 
not  guarantee  success.  We've  succeeded  as  a  species  because  of  our 
ability  to  form  cultures.  Cultures  are  groups  of  people  who  come 
together around a common set of values and beliefs. When we share 
values and beliefs with others, we form trust. Trust of others allows 
us  to  rely  on  others  to  help  protect  our  children  and  ensure  our 
personal  survival.  The  ability  to  leave  the  den  to hunt  or  explore 
with  confidence  that  the  community  will  protect  your  family  and 
your  stuff  until  you  return  is  one  of  the  most  important  factors  in 
the survival of an individual and the advancement of our species. 
That  we  trust  people  with  common  values  and  beliefs  is  not,  in 
itself, a profound assertion. There is a reason we're not friends with 
everyone we meet. We're friends with people who see the world the 
way  we  see  it,  who  share  our  views  and  our  belief  set.  No  matter 
how good a match someone looks on paper, that doesn't guarantee a 
friendship.  You  can  think  of  it  on  a  macro  scale  also.  The  world  is 
filled  with  different  cultures.  Being  American  is  not  better  than 
being  French.  They  are  just  different  cultures—not better  or  worse, 
just    different.    American    culture    strongly    values    ideals    of 
entrepreneurship,   independence   and   self-reliance.   We   call   our 
WHY—the  American  Dream.  French  culture  strongly  values  ideals 
of unified identity, group reliance and joie de vivre. (Notice that we 
use  the  French  word  to  describe  the  joy-of-life  lifestyle.  Coinci-
dence?  Perhaps.)  Some  people  are  good  fits  in  French  culture  and 

START WITH WHY 
98 
some  people  are  good  fits  in  American  culture.  It  is  not  a  matter  of 
better or worse, they are just different. 
Most  people  who  are  born  and  raised  in  one  culture will,  for 
obvious reasons, end up being a reasonably good fit in that culture, 
but not always. There are people who grew up in France who never 
quite felt like they belonged; they were misfits in their own culture. 
So  they  moved,  maybe  to  America.  Drawn  to  the  feelings  they  had 
for   America's   WHY,   they   followed   the   American   Dream   and 
emigrated. 
It  is  always  said  that  America  is  fueled  in  large  part  by  immi-
grants.  But  it  is  completely  false  that  all  immigrants  make  produc-
tive  members  of  a  society.  It's  not  true  that  all  immigrants  have  an 
entrepreneurial  spirit—just  the  ones  that  are  viscerally  drawn  to 
America. That's what a WHY does. When it is clearly understood, it 
attracts  people  who  believe  the  same  thing.  And  assuming  they  are 
good fits for what Americans believe and how they do things, those 
immigrants  will  say  of  America,  "I  love  it  here,"  or  "I  love  this 
country."  This  visceral  reaction  has  less  to  do  with  America  and 
more  to  do  with  them.  It's  how  they  feel  about  their  own  opportu-
nity  and  their  own  ability  to  thrive  in  a  culture  in  which  they  feel 
like they belong versus the one they came from. 
And  within  the  big  WHY  that  is  America,  it  breaks  down  even 
further. Some people are better fits in New York and some are better 
fits in Minneapolis. One culture is not better or worse than the other, 
they are just different. Many people dream of moving to New York, 
for   example,   attracted   to   the   glamour   or   the   perception   of 
opportunity. They arrive with aspirations of making it big, but they 
fail  to  consider  whether  they  will  fit  into  the  culture  before  they 
make their move. Some  make it. But so  many don't. Over and over, 
I've seen people come to New York with big hopes and dreams, but 
either couldn't find the job they wanted or they found it but couldn't 
take the pressure. They are not dumb or bad or poor workers. They 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
99 
were  just  bad  fits.  They  either  stay  in  New  York  and  exert  more 
effort  than  they  need  to,  hating  their  jobs  and  their  lives,  or  they 
move. If they  move to a city in  which they are better fits— Chicago 
or  San  Francisco  or  somewhere  else—they  often  end  up  much 
happier and more successful. New York is not rationally better than 
other  cities,  it's  just  not  right  for  everyone.  Like  all  cities,  it's  only 
right for those who are good fits. 
The  same  can  be  said  for  any  place  that  has  a  strong  culture  or 
recognizable  personality.  We  do  better  in  cultures in  which  we  are 
good  fits.  We  do  better  in  places  that  reflect  our own  values  and 
beliefs. Just  as  the  goal  is  not  to  do  business  with  anyone  who  sim-
ply  wants  what  you  have,  but  to  do  business  with  people  who  be-
lieve  what  you  believe,  so  too  is  it  beneficial  to live  and  work  in  a 
place  where  you  will  naturally  thrive  because  your values  and  be-
liefs align with the values and beliefs of that culture. 
Now  consider  what  a  company  is.  A  company  is  a  culture.  A 
group  of  people  brought  together  around  a  common  set  of  values 
and  beliefs.  It's  not  products  or  services  that  bind  a  company  to-
gether.  It's  not  size  and  might  that  make  a  company  strong,  it's  the 
culture—the  strong  sense  of  beliefs  and  values  that  everyone,  from 
the CEO to the receptionist, all share. So the logic follows, the goal is 
not  to  hire  people  who  simply  have  a  skill  set  you need,  the  goal  is 
to hire people who believe what you believe. 
Finding the People Who Believe What You Believe 
Early in the twentieth century, the English adventurer Ernest Shack- 
leton  set  out  to  explore  the  Antarctic.  Roald  Amundsen,  a  Norwe- 
gian, had only just become the first explorer ever to reach the South 
Pole,  leaving  one  remaining  conquest:  the  crossing of  the  continent 
via the southernmost tip of the earth. 
The land part of the expedition would start at the frigid Weddell 
Sea, below South America, and travel 1,700 miles across the pole to 

START WITH WHY 
100 
the Ross Sea, below New Zealand. The cost, Shackleton estimated at 
the time,  would be about $250,000. "The crossing of the south polar 
continent   will   be   the   biggest   polar   journey   ever   attempted," 
Shackleton  told  a  reporter  for  the New York Times  on  December  29, 
1913. "The unknown fields in the world which are still unconquered 
are narrowing down, but there still remains this great work." 
On  December  5,  1914,  Shackleton  and  a  crew  of  twenty-seven 
men  set  out  for  the  Weddell  Sea  on  the Endurance,  a  350-ton  ship 
that  had  been  constructed  with  funds  from  private  donors,  the 
British  government  and  the  Royal  Geographical  Society.  By  then, 
World  War  I  was  raging  in  Europe,  and  money  was  growing  more 
scarce.  Donations  from  English  schoolchildren  paid for  the  dog 
teams. 
But the crew of the Endurance would never reach the continent of 
Antarctica. 
Just  a  few  days  out  of  South  Georgia  Island  in  the southern 
Adantic,  the  ship  encountered  mile  after  mile  of  pack  ice,  and  was 
soon  trapped  as  winter  moved  in  early  and  with  fury.  Ice  closed  in 
around the ship "like an almond in a piece of toffee," a crew member 
wrote.  Shackleton  and  his  crew  were  stranded  in  the  Antarctic  for 
ten months as the Endurance drifted slowly north, until the pressure 
of the ice floes finally crushed the ship.  On November 21, 1915, the 
crew watched as she sank in the frigid waters of the Weddell Sea. 
Stranded  on  the  ice,  the  crew  of  the  Endurance  boarded  their 
three lifeboats and landed on tiny Elephant Island. There Shackleton 
left  behind  all  but  five  of  his  men  and  embarked  on  a  hazardous 
journey across 800 miles of rough seas  to find  help.  Which, eventu-
ally, they did. 
What  makes  the  story  of  the Endurance  so  remarkable,  however,  is 
not  the  expedition,  it's  that  throughout  the  whole ordeal  no  one 
died, There were no stories of people eating others and no mutiny. 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
101 
This  was  not  luck.  This  was  because  Shackleton  hired  good  fits. 
He  found  the  right  men  for  the  job.  When  you  fill  an  organization 
with  good  fits,  those  who  believe  what  you  believe,  success  just 
happens.  And  how  did  Shackleton  find  this  amazing  crew?  With  a 
simple ad in the London Times. 
Compare  that  to  how  we  hire  people.  Like  Shackleton,  we  run 
ads  in  the  newspaper,  or  on  the  modern  equivalents,  Craigslist  or 
Monster.com. Sometimes we hire a recruiter to find someone for us, 
but  the  process  is  largely  the  same.  We  provide  a  list  of  qualifica-
tions  for  the  job  and  expect  that  the  best  candidate  will  be  the  one 
who meets those requirements. 
The  issue  is  how  we  write  those  ads.  They  are  all  about  WHAT 
and  not  about  WHY.  A  want  ad  might  say,  for  example,  "Account 
executive   needed,   minimum   five   years'   experience,   must   have 
working  knowledge  of  industry.  Come  work  for  a  fantastic,  fast-
growing  company  with  great  pay  and  great  benefits."  The  ad  may 
produce loads of applicants, but how do we know which is the right 
fit? 
Shackleton's ad for crew members was different. His did not say 
WHAT he was looking for. His ad did not say: 
"Men  needed  for  expedition.  Minimum  five  years'  experience. 
Must  know  how  to  hoist  mainsail.  Come  work  for  a  fantastic 
captain." 
Rather,  Shackleton  was  looking  for  those  with  something  more. 
He was looking for a crew that belonged on such an expedition. His 
actual ad ran like this: 
"Men  wanted  for  Hazardous  journey.  Small  wages,  bitter  cold, 
long  months  of  complete  darkness,  constant  danger, safe  return 
doubtful. Honour and recognition in case of success." 
The only people who applied for the job were those who read the ad 
and thought it sounded great. They loved insurmountable odds. The 
only  people  who  applied  for  the  job  were  survivors.  Shackleton 

START WITH WHY 
102 
hired  only  people  who  believed  what  he  believed.  Their  ability  to 
survive   was   guaranteed.   When   employees   belong,   they   will 
guarantee  your  success.  And  they  won't  be  working  hard  and 
looking  for  innovative  solutions  for  you,  they  will  be  doing  it  for 
themselves. 
What all great leaders have in common is the ability to find good 
fits to join their organizations—those who believe what they believe. 
Southwest Airlines is a great example of a company with a knack for 
hiring good fits. Their ability to find people who embody their cause 
makes  it  much  easier  for  them  to  provide  great  service.  As  Herb 
Kelleher  famously  said,  "You  don't  hire  for  skills,  you  hire  for 
attitude.  You  can  always  teach  skills."  This  is  all  fine  and  good;  the 
problem is, which attitude? What if their attitude is not one that fits 
your culture? 
I  love  asking  companies  whom  they  like  to  hire,  and  one  of  the 
most  common  answers  I  am  given  is,  "We  hire  only  passionate 
people."  But  how  do  you  know  if  someone  is  passionate  for  inter-
viewing,  but  not  so  passionate  for  working?  The  truth  is,  almost 
every  person  on  the  planet  is  passionate,  we  are  just  not  all  pas-
sionate  for  the  same  things.  Starting  with  WHY  when  hiring  dra-
matically  increases  your  ability  to  attract  those  who  are  passionate 
for  what  you  believe.  Simply  hiring  people  with  a  solid  resume  or 
great  work  ethic  does  not  guarantee  success.  The  best  engineer  at 
Apple,  for  example,  would  likely  be  miserable  if  he  worked  at  Mi-
crosoft. Likewise, the best engineer at Microsoft would probably not 
thrive  at  Apple.  Both  are  highly  experienced  and  work  hard.  Both 
may  come  highly  recommended.  However,  each  engineer  does  not 
fit the culture of the other's company. The  goal is to hire those  who 
are  passionate  for  your  WHY,  your  purpose,  cause  or  belief,  and 
who have the attitude that fits your culture. Once that is established, 
only   then   should   their   skill   set   and   experience   be evaluated. 
Shackleton could have had the most experienced crew money could 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
103 
buy, but if they weren't able to connect on a level much deeper than 
their   ability,   their   survival   would   not   have   been   a   foregone 
conclusion. 
For  years,  Southwest  didn't  have  a  complaints  department—  they 
didn't  need  one.  Though  Kelleher  rightly  talked  about  the  need  to 
hire  for  attitude,  the  airline  in  fact  deserves  more  credit  for  hiring 
the  good  fits  responsible  for  providing  great  service.  Kelleher  was 
not  the  only  one  making  the  hiring  decisions,  and  asking  everyone 
to  simply  trust  their  gut  is  too  risky.  Their  genius  came  from 
figuring  out  why  some  people  were  such  good  fits  and  then  devel-
oping systems to find more of them. 
In  the  1970s,  Southwest  Airlines  decided  to  put  their  flight  at-
tendants in hot pants and go-go boots as part of their uniforms (hey, 
it   was   the   1970s).   It   wasn't   their   idea;   Pacific   Southwest,   the 
California-based airline after which Southwest modeled itself, did it 
first,   Southwest   simply   copied   them.   Unlike   Pacific   Southwest, 
however,  Southwest  figured  out  something  that  would  prove  in-
valuable.  They  realized  that  when  they  recruited  flight  attendants, 
the  only  people  who  applied  for  the  job  were  cheerleaders  and 
majorettes.  That's  because  they  were  the  only  people  who  didn't 
mind   wearing   the   new   uniforms.   Cheerleaders   and   majorettes, 
however, fit in perfectly at  Southwest. They didn't just have a great 
attitude,  their  whole  disposition  was  about  cheering  people  on. 
Spreading  optimism.  Leading  crowds  to  believe  that "we  can  win." 
They  were  perfect  fits  at  a  company  that  was  the  champion  of  the 
common  man.  Realizing  this,  Southwest  started  to  recruit  only 
cheerleaders and majorettes. 
Great  companies  don't  hire  skilled  people  and  motivate  them, 
they  hire  already  motivated  people  and  inspire  them.  People  are 
either  motivated  or  they  are  not.  Unless  you  give  motivated  people 
something  to  believe  in,  something  bigger  than  their  job  to  work 

START WITH WHY 
104 
toward,  they  will  motivate  themselves  to  find  a  new  job  and  you'll 
be stuck with whoever's left. 
Give 'Em a Cathedral 
Consider  the  story  of  two  stonemasons.  You  walk  up to  the  first 
stonemason and ask, "Do you like your job?" He looks up at you and 
replies,  "I've  been  building  this  wall  for  as  long as  I  can  remember. 
The  work  is  monotonous.  I  work  in  the  scorching  hot  sun  all  day. 
The   stones   are   heavy   and   lifting   them   day   after   day   can   be 
backbreaking.  I'm  not  even  sure  if  this  project  will  be  completed  in 
my  lifetime.  But  it's  a  job.  It  pays  the  bills."  You  thank  him  for  his 
time and walk on. 
About  thirty  feet  away,  you  walk  up  to  a  second  stonemason. 
You ask him the same question, "Do you like your job?" He looks up 
and  replies,  "I  love  my job.  I'm  building  a  cathedral.  Sure,  I've  been 
working  on  this  wall  for  as  long  as  I  can  remember,  and  yes,  the 
work is sometimes monotonous. I work in the scorching hot sun all 
day.  The  stones  are  heavy  and  lifting  them  day  after  day  can  be 
backbreaking.  I'm  not  even  sure  if  this  project  will  be  completed  in 
my lifetime. But I'm building a cathedral." 
WHAT these two stonemasons are doing is exactly the same; the 
difference  is,  one  has  a  sense  of  purpose.  He  feels  like  he  belongs. 
He comes to work to be a part of something bigger than the job he's 
doing. Simply having a sense of WHY changes his entire view of his 
job.   It   makes   him   more   productive   and   certainly   more   loyal. 
Whereas  the  first  stonemason  would  probably  take  another  job  for 
more  pay,  the  inspired  stonemason  works  longer  hours  and  would 
probably  turn  down  an  easier,  higher-paying  job  to stay  and  be  a 
part  of  the  higher  cause.  The  second  stonemason  does  not  see  him-
self  as  any  more  or  less  important  than  the  guy  making  the  stained 
glass  windows  or  even  the  architect.  They  are  all  working  together 
to  build  the  cathedral.  It  is  this  bond  that  creates  camaraderie.  And 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
105 
that  camaraderie  and  trust  is  what  brings  success. People  working 
together for a common cause. 
Companies  with  a  strong  sense  of  WHY  are  able  to  inspire  their 
employees.  Those  employees  are  more  productive  and innovative, 
and  the  feeling  they  bring  to  work  attracts  other  people  eager  to 
work there as well. It's  not such a stretch to  see why the companies 
that we love to do business with are also the best employers. When 
people  inside  the  company  know  WHY  they  come  to  work,  people 
outside the company are vastly more likely to understand WHY the 
company is special. In these organizations, from the management on 
down,  no one sees themselves as any  more  or any less than anyone 
else. They all need each other. 
When Motivated by WHY, Success Just Happens 
It  was  a  turn-of-the-century  version  of  the  dot-com  boom.  The 
promise  of  a  revolutionary  new  technology  was  changing  the  way 
people imagined the future. And there  was a race to see who could 
do  it  first.  It  was  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  the  new 
technology was the airplane. One of the best-known men in the field 
was Samuel Pierpont Langley. Like many other inventors of his day, 
he  was  attempting  to  build  the  world's  first  heavier-than-  air  flying 
machine.  The  goal  was to  be the first to achieve  machine- powered, 
controlled,  manned  flight.  The  good  news  was  Langley  had  all  the 
right  ingredients  for  the  enormous  task;  he  had,  what  most  would 
define as, the recipe for success. 
Langley  had  achieved  some  renown  within  the  academic  com-
munity  as  an  astronomer,  which  earned  him  high-ranking  and 
prestigious  positions.  He  was  secretary  of  the  Smithsonian  Institu-
tion.  He  had  been  an  assistant  in  the  Harvard  College  Observatory 
and  professor  of  mathematics  at  the  United  States  Naval  Academy. 
Langley  was  very  well  connected.  His  friends  included  some  of  the 
most powerful men in government and business, including Andrew 

START WITH WHY 
106 
Carnegie  and  Alexander  Graham  Bell.  He  was  also  extremely  well 
funded.  The  War  Department,  the  precursor  the  Department  of 
Defense,  had  given  him  $50,000  for  the  project,  a  lot  of  money  in 
those days. Money was no object. 
Langley  assembled  some  of  the  best  and  brightest  minds  of  the 
day.  His  dream  team  included  test  pilot  Charles  Manly,  a  brilliant 
Cornell-trained  mechanical  engineer,  and  Stephan  Balzer,  the  de-
veloper of the first car in New York. Langley and his team used the 
finest materials. The market conditions were perfect and his PR was 
great.   The  New  York  Times   followed   him   around   everywhere. 
Everyone knew Langley and was rooting for his success. 
But there was a problem. 
Langley  had  a  bold  goal,  but  he  didn't  have  a  clear  sense  of 
WHY.  His  purpose  for  wanting  to  build  the  plane  was  defined  in 
terms of WHAT he was doing and WHAT he could get. He had had 
a  passion  for  aeronautics  since  a  very  young  age,  but  he  did  not 
have   a   cause   to   champion.   More   than   anything   else, Langley 
wanted  to  be  first.  He  wanted  to  be  rich  and  he  wanted  to  be 
famous. That was his driving motivation. 
Although  already  well  regarded  in  his  own  field,  he  craved  the 
kind  of  fame  of  a  Thomas  Edison  or  Alexander  Graham  Bell,  the 
kind  that  comes  only  with  inventing  something  big. Langley  saw 
the  airplane  as  his  ticket  to  fame  and  fortune.  He was  smart  and 
motivated.  He  had  what  we  still  assume  is  the  recipe  for  success: 
plenty of cash, the best people and ideal market conditions. But few 
of us have ever heard of Samuel Pierpont Langley. 
A few hundred miles away in Dayton, Ohio, Orville and Wilbur 
Wright  were  also  building  a  flying  machine.  Unlike Langley,  the 
Wright  brothers  did  not  have  the  recipe  for  success.  Worse,  they 
seemed to have the recipe for failure. There was no funding for their 
venture.  No  government  grants.  No  high-level  connections.  The 
Wright  brothers  funded  their  dream  with  the  proceeds  from  their 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
107 
bicycle  shop.  Not  a  single  person  working  on  the  team,  including 
Orville and Wilbur, had a college education; some did not even fin-
ish  high  school.  What  the  Wright  brothers  were  doing  wasn't  any 
different from Langley or all the others trying to build a flying ma-
chine.  But  the  Wright  brothers  did  have  something  very  special. 
They  had  a  dream.  They  knew  WHY  it  was  important  to  build  this 
thing.  They  believed  that  if  they  could  figure  out this  flying  ma-
chine,  it  would  change  the  world.  They  imagined  the  benefits  to 
everyone else if they were successful. 
"Wilbur  and  Orville  were  true  scientists,  deeply  and  genuinely 
concerned  about  the  physical  problem  they  were  trying  to  solve— 
the  problem  of  balance  and  flight,"  said  James  Tobin,  the  Wright 
brothers'  biographer.  Langley,  on  the  other  hand,  was  consumed 
with acquiring the level of prestige of his associates like Alexander 
Graham Bell, fame that he knew would come only with a major sci-
entific   breakthrough.   Langley,   Tobin   said,   "did   not   have   the 
Wrights' passion for flight, but rather was looking for achievement." 
Orville  and  Wilbur  preached  what  they  believed  and inspired 
others  in  the  community  to  join  them  in  their  cause.  The  proof  of 
their  commitment  was  self-evident.  With  failure  after  failure,  most 
would  have  given  up,  but  not  the  Wright  brothers'  team.  The  team 
was  so  inspired  that  no  matter  how  many  setbacks  they  suffered 
they would show up for more. Every time the Wright brothers went 
out to make a test flight, so the stories go, they would take five sets 
of  parts  with  them,  because  they  knew  that's  how  many  times  they 
were likely to fail before deciding to come home for the day. 
Then  it  happened.  On  December  17,  1903,  on  a  field in  Kitty 
Hawk, North Carolina, the Wright brothers took  to the sky. A fifty- 
nine-second flight at an altitude of 120 feet at the speed of a jog was 
all  it  took  to  usher  in  a  new  technology  that  would  change  the 
world. 

START WITH WHY 
108 
Remarkable    as    the    achievement    was,    it    went    relatively 
unnoticed.  The  New  York  Times  was  not  there  to  cover  the  story. 
Driven   by   something   bigger   than   fame   and   glory,   the   Wright 
brothers  were content to wait to tell the world. They  understood its 
true significance to the world. 
What  Langley  and  the  Wright  brothers  were  trying  to  create  was 
exactly  the  same;  both  were  building  the  same  product.  Both  the 
Wright  brothers  and  Langley  were  highly  motivated. Both  had  a 
strong work ethic. Both had keen scientific  minds. What the Wright 
brothers'  team  had  that  Langley  did  wasn't  luck.  It  was  inspiration. 
One was motivated by the prospect of fame and wealth, the other by 
a  belief.  The  Wright  brothers  excited  the  human  spirit  of  those 
around  them.  Langley  paid  for  talent  to  help  him  get  rich  and 
famous.  The  Wright  brothers  started  with  WHY.  Further  proof 
Langley was motivated by WHAT, a few days after Orville and Wil-
bur  took  flight,  Langley  quit.  He  got  out  of  the  business.  He  could 
have  said,  "That's  amazing,  now  I'm  going  to  improve  upon  their 
technology."  But  he  didn't.  He  found  the  defeat  humiliating—his 
own  test  flight  had  landed  in  the  Potomac  River,  and  the  newspa-
pers  all  made  fun  of  him.  He  cared  so  much  about  what  others 
thought  of  him,  he  was  so  preoccupied  with  becoming  famous.  He 
wasn't first, so he simply quit. 
Innovation Happens at the Edges 
Dream  teams  are  not  always  so  dreamy.  When  a  team  of  experts 
comes together they often work for themselves and not for the good 
of the whole. This is what happens when companies feel the need to 
pay  mega-salaries  to  "get  the  best  talent."  Those  people  are  not 
necessarily showing up because they believe in your WHY, they are 
showing up for the money. A classic manipulation. Paying someone 
a lot of money and asking them to come up with great ideas ensures 
very little. However, pulling together a team of like- minded people 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
109 
and  giving  them  a  cause  to  pursue  ensures  a  greater  sense  of 
teamwork  and  camaraderie.  Langley  pulled  together  a  dream  team 
and promised them riches. The Wright brothers inspired a group of 
people  to  join  them  in  pursuit  of  something  bigger than  each 
member   of   the   team.   Average   companies   give   their   people 
something   to   work   on.   In   contrast,   the   most   innovative   or-
ganizations give their people something to work toward. 
The role of a leader is not to come up with all the great ideas. The 
role of a leader is to create an environment in which great ideas can 
happen. It is the people inside the company, those on the front lines, 
who are best qualified to find new ways of doing things. The people 
who answer the phones and talk to customers, for example, can tell 
you  more  about  the  kinds  of  questions  they  get  than  can  anyone 
sitting  in  an  executive  suite  miles  away.  If  the  people  inside  a 
company  are  told  to  come  to  work  and  just  do  their job,  that's  all 
they  will  do.  If  they  are  constantly  reminded  WHY  the  company 
was founded and told to always look for ways to bring that cause to 
life  while  performing  their  job,  however,  then  they  will  do  more 
than their job. 
Steve Jobs, for example, did not personally come up with the iPod or 
iTunes  or  the  iPhone.  Others  inside  the  company  did.  Jobs  gave 
people   a   filter,   a   context,   a   higher   purpose   around   which   to 
innovate:  find  existing  status-quo  industries,  those  in  which  com-
panies  fight  to  protect  their  old-fashioned  business  models,  and 
challenge  them.  This  is  WHY  Apple  was  founded,  it  is  what  Jobs 
and  Wozniak  did  when  they  started  the  company,  and it  is  what 
Apple's  people  and  products  have  done  ever  since.  It's  a  repeating 
pattern. Apple's employees simply look for ways to bring their cause 
to life in as many places as they can. And it works. 
It  is  not  the  same  at  many  other  companies.  Companies  that 
define  themselves  by  WHAT  they  do  instead  of  WHY  they  do  it 
instruct  their  people  to  be  innovative  around  a  product  or  service. 

START WITH WHY 
110 
"Make  it  better,"  they  are  instructed.  Those  who  work  for  Apple's 
competitors,  companies  that  have  defined  themselves  as  "computer 
manufacturers,"  come  to  work  to  develop  "more  innovative"  com-
puters. The best they can do is add more RAM, add a feature or two, 
or,  as  one  PC  maker  has  done,  give  people  the  option  to  customize 
the  color  of  their  computer  casing.  This  hardly  qualifies  as  an  idea 
with  the  potential  to  change  the  course  of  an  industry.  A  nice 
feature,  for  sure,  but  not  innovation.  If  you  are  curious  as  to  how 
Colgate  finds  itself  with  thirty-two  different  types  of  toothpaste 
today,  it  is  because  every  day  its  people  come  to  work  to  develop  a 
better  toothpaste  and  not,  for  example,  to  look  for  ways  to  help 
people feel more confident about themselves. 
Apple  does  not  have  a  lock  on  good  ideas;  there  are  smart,  in-
novative thinkers at most companies. But great companies give their 
people a purpose or challenge around which to develop ideas rather 
than  simply  instruct  them  to  make  a  better  mousetrap.  Companies 
that  study  their  competitors  in  hopes  of  adding  the  features  and 
benefits  that  will  make their  products  "better"  are  only  working  to 
entrench  the  company  in  WHAT  it  does.  Companies  with  a  clear 
sense  of  WHY  tend  to  ignore  their  competition,  whereas  those  with 
a fuzzy sense of WHY are obsessed with what others are doing. 
The  ability  of  a  company  to  innovate  is  not  just  useful  for  de-
veloping  new  ideas,  it  is  invaluable  for  navigating  struggle.  When 
people  come  to  work  with  a  higher  sense  of  purpose,  they  find  it 
easier  to  weather  hard  times  or  even  to  find  opportunity  in  those 
hard times. People who come to work with a clear sense of WHY are 
less prone to giving up after a few failures because they understand 
the  higher  cause.  Thomas  Edison,  a  man  definitely  driven  by  a 
higher cause, said, "I didn't find a way to make a light bulb, I found 
a thousand ways how not to make one." 
Southwest   Airlines   is   famous   for   pioneering   the   ten-minute 
turnaround—the  ability  to  deplane,  prep,  and  board a  plane  in  ten 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
111 
minutes. This ability helps an airline make more money, because the 
more  the  planes  are  in  the  sky,  the  better  the  company  is  doing. 
What  few  people  realize  is  that  this  innovation  was  born  out  of 
struggle. In 1971, Southwest was running low on cash and needed to 
sell one of their aircraft to stay in business. This left them with three 
planes  to  fly  a  schedule  that  required  four.  They  had  two  choices: 
they could scale back their operations, or they could figure out how 
to  turn  their  planes  around  in  ten  minutes.  And  thus  was  born  the 
ten-minute turnaround. 
Whereas most other airline employees would have simply said it 
couldn't  be  done,  Southwest's  people  rallied  to  figure  out  how  to 
perform  the  unprecedented  and  seemingly  impossible task.  Today, 
their  innovation  is  still  paying  dividends.  Because  of  increased 
airport  congestion  and  larger  planes  and  cargo  loads,  Southwest 
now  takes  about  twenty-five  minutes  to  turn  their  planes  around. 
However,  if  they  were  to  try  to  keep  the  same  schedule  but  add 
even  five  minutes  to  the  turnaround  time,  they  would  need  an 
additional  eighteen  planes  in  their  fleet  at  a  cost  of  nearly  a  billion 
dollars. 
Southwest's  remarkable  ability  to  solve  problems,  Apple's  re-
markable  knack  for  innovation  and  the  Wright  brothers'  ability  to 
develop  a  technology  with  the  team  they  had  were  all  possible  for 
the  same  reason:  they  believed  they  could  and  they trusted  their 
people to do it. 
The Definition of Trust 
Founded by Sir Francis Baring in 1762, Barings Bank was the oldest 
merchant  bank  in  England.  The  bank,  which  survived the  Napole-
onic  Wars,  World  War  I  and  World  War  II,  was  unable  to  survive 
the  predilection  for  risk  of  one  self-proclaimed  rogue  trader.  Nick 
Leeson  single-handedly  brought  down  Barings  Bank  in  1995  by 
performing some unauthorized, extremely high-risk trades. Had the 
proverbial  winds  continued  to  blow  in  the  right  direction,  Leeson 

START WITH WHY 
112 
would  have  made  himself  and  the  bank  extremely  rich  and  he 
would have been hailed as a hero. 
But  such  is  the  nature  of  unpredictable  things  like  the  weather 
and financial markets. Few dispute that what Leeson was doing was 
anything more than gambling. And gambling is very different from 
calculated risk. Calculated risk accepts that there can be great loses, 
but steps are taken to either guard against or respond to an unlikely 
but possible outcome. Even though an emergency landing on water 
is  "unlikely,"  as  the  airlines  tell  us,  they  still provide  us  lifejackets. 
And if only for peace of mind, we're glad they do. To  do otherwise 
is  a  gamble  few  airlines  would  be  willing  to  take, even  though  the 
actuarial tables are heavily weighted on their side. 
Leeson  strangely  held  two  positions  at  Barings,  ostensibly  serv-
ing  as  both  a  trader  and  his  own  supervisor,  but  that  fact  is  not 
interesting  given  the  subject  matter.  That  one  man had  such  a  tol-
erance  for  risk  that  he  could  create  so  much  damage  is  not  very 
interesting  either.  Both  of  those  are  short-term  factors.  Both  would 
have  ended  if  Leeson  had  either  left  the  company  or  changed  jobs, 
or  if  Barings  had  assigned  a  new  supervisor  to  oversee  his  opera-
tions. What is  more  interesting is the culture at the bank that could 
allow these conditions to exist in the first place. Barings had lost its 
WHY. 
The  culture  at  Barings  was  no  longer  one  in  which  people  came 
to  work  inspired.  Motivated,  yes,  but  not  inspired.  Manipulated  by 
the  promise  of  massive  payouts  for  performance,  for  sure,  but  not 
inspired  to  work  in  the  best  interest  of  the  whole.  As  Leeson  re- 
ported  in  his  own  account  of  how  he  got  away  with  such  risky  be-
havior  for  so  long,  he  said  it  was  not  that  others didn't  recognize 
that  what  he  was  doing  was  potentially  dangerous.  It  was  worse 
than  that.  There  was  a  stigma  against  speaking  out.  "People  at  the 
London  end  of  Barings,"  Leeson  explained,  "were  all  so  know-all 
that nobody dared ask a stupid question in case they looked silly in 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
113 
front  of everyone else." The lack of a clear set  of values and beliefs, 
along with the weak culture that resulted, created the conditions for 
an  every-man-for-himself  environment,  the  long-term  impact  of 
which  could  yield  little  else  than  disaster.  This  is  caveman  stuff.  If 
the people aren't looking out for the community, then the benefits of 
a community erode. Many companies have star employees and star 
salesmen  and  so  on,  but  few  have  a  culture  that  produces  great 
people as a rule and not an exception. 
Trust is a remarkable thing. Trust allows us to rely on others. We 
rely on those we trust for advice to help us make decisions. Trust is 
the bedrock for the advancement of our own lives, our families, our 
companies,  our  societies  and  our  species.  We  trust those  in  our 
community  to  care  for  our  children  so  we  can  go  out  to  dinner. 
Given the choice between two babysitters, we're more likely to trust 
a babysitter with a little experience from the neighborhood than one 
with  lots  of  experience  from  far  away.  We  wouldn't trust  someone 
from  the  outside  because  we  don't  know  anything  about  them,  we 
say.   The   reality   is,   we   don't   know   anything   about   the   local 
babysitter either, beyond the fact that she's from the  neighborhood. 
In  this  case,  we  trust  familiarity  over  experience with  something 
quite  important—the  safety  of  our  children.  We  trust  that  someone 
who  lives  in  the  community  and  more  likely  shares  our  values  and 
beliefs  is  better  qualified  to  care  for  the  most  valuable  thing  in  our 
lives  over  someone  with  a  long  resume  but  from  an  unfamiliar 
place. That's pretty remarkable. It causes some pause when we con-
sider how we hire people: what's more important, their resume and 
experience,  or  whether  they  will  fit  our  community?  Our  children 
are probably more important than the position we want to fill at the 
organization, yet we seem to exercise a very different standard. 
Is  there  a  false  assumption  at  play  here  as  to  who makes  the  best 
employee? 

START WITH WHY 
114 
Historically,  trust  has  played  a  bigger  role  in  advancing  compa-
nies  and  societies  than  skill  set  alone.  Like  the  couple  leaving  their 
children  while  they  go  out  on  a  date  for  the  evening,  groups  from 
within  a  society  would  go  off  with  confidence,  knowing  that  their 
homes  and  families  would  be  safe  upon  their  return.  If  there  were 
no  trust,  then  no  one  would  take  risks.  No  risks  would  mean  no 
exploration, no experimentation and no advancement of the  society 
as a whole. That's a remarkable concept: only when individuals can 
trust  the  culture  or  organization  will  they  take  personal  risks  in 
order  to  advance  that  culture  or  organization  as  a whole.  For  no 
other reason than, in the end, it's good for their own personal health 
and survival. 
No matter how experienced, no matter how proficient, a trapeze 
artist will not attempt a totally new death-defying leap without first 
trying  it  with  a  net  below  him.  And  depending  on  how  death- 
defying the trick is, he may insist on always having a net when per-
forming  the  trick.  Besides  its  obvious  advantage  of  catching  you  if 
you fall, the net also provides a psychological benefit. Knowing it is 
there  gives  the  trapeze  artist  the  confidence  to  try  something  he's 
never done before, or  to do it again and again.  Remove the net and 
he  will  only  do  the  safe  tricks,  the  ones  he  knows he  can  land.  The 
more he trusts the quality of the net, the more he will take personal 
risks  to  make  his  act  better.  The  trust  the  circus management  gives 
him by providing him a net is probably afforded to other performers 
too. Soon all the performers will feel confident to try new things and 
push themselves further. That collection of personal confidence and 
personal  risk  results  in  the  entire  circus  putting on  a  much  better 
show.  An  overall  better  show  means  more  customers. And  the 
system thrives. But not without trust. For those within a community, 
or an organization, they must trust that their leaders provide a net—
practical  or  emotional.  With  that  feeling  of  support,  those  in  the 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
115 
organization  are  more  likely  to  put  in  extra  effort  that  ultimately 
benefits the group as a whole. 
I will admit that there are always those who will take the risk, for 
the  first  time  or  repeatedly,  without  the  net.  There  will  always  be 
those who will explore regardless of who is home holding down the 
fort.   These   people   sometimes   earn   their   rightful   spots   as   the 
innovators.  The  ones  who  pushed  further,  the  ones  who  did  things 
no  one  else  would  do.  Some  of  them  may  advance  a  business  or 
even  society.  And  some  of  them  end  up  dead  before  they  achieve 
anything. 
There  is  big  a  difference  between  jumping  out  of  a plane  with  a 
parachute on and jumping without one. Both produce extraordinary 
experiences,  but  only  one  increases  the  likelihood of  being  able  to 
try   again   another   time.   A   trapeze   artist   with   a   personality 
predisposed to taking extraordinary risks without a  net  may be the 
star  attraction  in  an  otherwise  mediocre  show.  But if  he  dies  or 
leaves for another circus, then what? This is the paradigm in which 
someone is motivated by self-gain regardless of the consequences or 
the benefits to the organization for which he or she works. In such a 
case,  the  effort  may  be  good  for  the  individual  and  it  may  be  good 
for the group, but the benefits, especially for the group, come with a 
time  limit.  Over  time,  this  system  will  break  down,  often  to  the 
detriment of the organization. Developing trust to encourage people 
other  than  those  with  a  predilection  for  risk,  like  Nick  Leeson,  is  a 
better long-term strategy. 
Great  organizations  become  great  because  the  people  inside  the 
organization  feel  protected.  The  strong  sense  of  culture  creates  a 
sense  of  belonging  and  acts  like  a  net.  People  come  to  work  know-
ing  that  their  bosses,  colleagues  and  the  organization  as  a  whole 
will  look  out  for  them.  This  results  in  reciprocal behavior.  Indi-
vidual  decisions,  efforts  and  behaviors  that  support,  benefit  and 
protect the long-term interest of the organization as a whole. 

START WITH WHY 
116 
Southwest  Airlines,  a  company  renowned  for  its  customer  focus, 
does not, as a matter of policy, believe the customer is always right. 
Southwest  will  not  tolerate  customers  who  abuse  their  staff.  They 
would  rather  those  customers  fly  on  a  different  airline.  It's  a  subtle 
irony that one of the best customer service companies in the country 
focuses on its employees before its customers. The trust between the 
management  and  the  employees,  not  dogma,  is  what  produces  the 
great  customer  service.  It  is  a  prerequisite,  then,  for  someone  to 
trust the culture in which they work to share the values and beliefs 
of  that  culture.  Without  it,  that  employee,  for  example,  is  simply  a 
bad  fit  and  likely  to  work  only  for  self-gain  without  consideration 
for the greater good. But if those inside the organization are a good 
fit,  the  opportunity  to  "go  the  extra  mile,"  to  explore,  to  invent,  to 
innovate,  to  advance  and,  more  importantly,  to  do  so  again  and 
again and again, increases dramatically. Only with mutual trust can 
an organization become great. 
Real Trust Comes from the Things You Can't See 
"Rambo  2,"  said  the  voice  over  Brigadier  General  Jumper's  radio, 
referring to him by his call sign. "Your group 180, twenty-five miles, 
closing fast." 
"Barnyard radar contact," replied Rambo 2, reporting that he had 
picked  up  the  enemy  group  on  his  own  radar.  A  one-star  general, 
John Jumper was an experienced F-15 pilot with thousands of hours 
of  flight  time  and  over  a  thousand  combat  hours.  By  all  measures, 
he  was  one  of  the  best.  Born  in  Paris,  Texas,  he  had  enjoyed  a 
distinguished  career.  He'd  flown just  about  everything  the  U.S.  Air 
Force   had,   from   cargo   planes   to   fighter   jets.   Decorated   and 
distinguished, the commander of his own combat wing, he was the 
embodiment  of  what  it  meant  to  be  a  fighter  pilot. Smart  and 
confident. 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
117 
But  on  that  day,  Jumper's  reaction  didn't  match  the  situation  he 
faced. By twenty-five miles, he would have been expected to fire his 
weapons  or  take  some  other  offensive  movement.  Fearing  that 
Jumper  was  locked  onto  the  wrong  contact  on  his  radar,  Captain 
Lori Robinson calmly repeated what she could see from miles away: 
"Rambo  2  confirm  radar  contact  YOUR  group  now  190  twenty 
miles." 
As  the  air  weapons  controller  who  was  watching  the action  on 
her radar screen from a nearby command-and-control center, it was 
Lori Robinson's job  to direct the pilot toward enemy aircraft so that 
he  could  use  his  weapons  to  intercept  and  destroy  them.  Unlike  an 
air  traffic  controller,  whose  job  it  is  to  keep  air  traffic  apart,  the 
weapons controller has to bring the planes closer together. From the 
vantage  point  of  the  radar  screen,  only  the  weapons  controller  has 
the big picture, as the pilot's onboard navigation system shows only 
what's directly in front of the aircraft. 
Captain  Robinson  saw  her  job  as  something  bigger,  however, 
than just staring at radar, something more profound than just being 
the  eyes  and  ears  for  the  pilots  who  were  hurtling into  harm's  way 
at 1,500 mph. Captain Robinson knew WHY  her job was important. 
She  saw  herself  as  responsible  for  clearing  a  path for  the  pilots  in 
her care so that they could do what they needed to do, so they could 
push  themselves  and  their  aircraft  further  with  greater  confidence. 
And  for  this  reason,  she  was  unusually  good  at  her job.  Robinson 
couldn't  make  mistakes.  If  she  did,  she  would  lose the  trust  of  her 
pilots  and,  worse,  they  would  lose  trust  in  themselves.  You  see,  it's 
confidence that makes fighter pilots so good at their jobs. 
And  then  it  happened.  Captain  Robinson  could  tell  from  the 
calm  of  Jumper's  voice  over  the  radio  that  he  was  unaware  of  the 
threat coming at him. On a cloudless day, 20,000 feet over the desert, 
the alarm screeched in Rambo 2's $25 million, state-of-the-art fighter 
jet.   He   looked   up   from   his   radar   screen   and   saw   the   enemy 

START WITH WHY 
118 
engaging  him.  "BREAK  RIGHT!  BREAK  RIGHT!"  he  screamed  into 
his radio. On October 9, 1988, Brigadier General John R Jumper was 
killed. 
Captain  Robinson  waited.  There  was  an  eerie  calm.  Before  too 
long,  Jumper  stormed  into  the  debriefing  room  at  Nellis  Air  Force 
Base.  "You  got  me  killed!"  he  barked  at  Captain  Robinson.  Situated 
in the Nevada desert, Nellis is home to the Air Force Fighter Weap-
ons  School,  and  on  that  day,  General  John  Jumper  took  a  direct  hit 
from a simulated missile from another U.S. Air Force jet playing the 
part of an enemy combatant. 
"Sir,  it  was  not  my  fault,"  Captain  Robinson  replied  calmly. 
"Check  the  video.  You'll  see."  General  Jumper,  then  the  57th  Wing 
commander, a graduate of the USAF Fighter Weapons School, and a 
former instructor at Nellis, routinely evaluated every detail of every 
training  mission  he  flew.  Pilots  often  relied  on  the  video  to  learn 
from  their  exercises.  The  video  didn't  lie.  And  it didn't  on  that  day 
either.   It   revealed   that   the   error   was   indeed   his, not   Captain 
Robinson's. It was a classic blunder. He had forgotten he was part of 
a team. He had forgotten that what made him so good at his job was 
not  just  his  ability.  Jumper  was  one  of  the  best  because  there  were 
others  who  were  looking  out  for  him.  A  massive  infrastructure  of 
people he couldn't see. 
Without   question   General   Jumper   had   been   given   the best 
equipment,  the  best  technology  and  the  best  training  that  money 
could  buy.  But  it  was  the  mechanics,  the  teachers, his  fellow  pilots, 
the culture of the Air Force and Captain Robinson who ensured that 
he  could  trust  himself  to  get  the  job  done.  General  Jumper  forgot 
WHY  he  was  so  good  and  made  a  split-second  decision  that  cost 
him his life. But this is what training is for, to learn these lessons. 
Some  sixteen  years  after  his  lesson  over  the  Nevada  desert, 
General  Jumper  went  on  to  big  things.  Now  a  retired  four-star 
general, he served as chief of staff of the U.S. Air Force from 2001 to 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
119 
2005,  the  highest-ranking  uniformed  office  in  the  entire  Air  Force, 
responsible  for  the  organization,  training  and  equipping  of  nearly 
700,000 active-duty, guard, reserve and civilian forces serving in the 
United States and overseas. As a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 
he,  along  with  the  other  service  chiefs,  advised  the  secretary  of 
defense, the National Security Council and the president. 
This  is  not,  however,  a  story  about  General  Jumper.  It  is  a  story 
about  Lori  Robinson.  Now  herself  a  brigadier  general  in  the  Air 
Force,  she  no  longer  has  her  face  down  a  scope.  There  are  no  more 
bogeys  and  bandits,  the  Air  Force's  nicknames  for  the  good  guys 
and the bad guys, in her life. Even though her job has changed, 
General  Robinson  still  starts  every  day  by  reminding  herself  WHY 
she came to work. 
As much as she misses "her kids," as she called those who served 
under her command, General Robinson is still looking for  ways she 
can clear a path for others so that they can push themselves and the 
organization further. "The  time to think of  yourself is done, it is  not 
about you, it is about the  lieutenants behind you," she'd remind  her 
students when she was an instructor at the Fighter Weapons School. 
"If  enough  of  us  do  this,"  she  goes  on,  referring  to  WHY  she  does 
what she does, "then we leave this military and this country in better 
shape than we found it. And isn't that the point?" And it is that sense 
of  purpose,  a  clear  idea  of  WHY  she  comes  to  work, that  has  been 
the    cornerstone    of    General    Robinson's    success.    And that, 
incidentally, has been remarkable. 
Working  hard  to  clear  a  path  for  others  so  that  they  can  confi-
dently  go  on  to  do  bigger  and  better  things  has  in turn  inspired 
others  to  clear  a  path  for  General  Robinson  to  do  exactly  the  same 
thing.  As  a  woman  in  the  very  masculine  world  of  the  military,  she 
sets  an  example  for  how  to  lead.  Great  leadership  is  not  about  flex-
ing  and  intimidation;  great  leaders,  as  General  Robinson  proves, 

START WITH WHY 
120 
lead with WHY. They embody a sense of purpose that inspires those 
around them. 
General  Robinson  was  so  trusted  as  a  weapons  controller  that  it 
was not unusual for pilots in training to request that she be assigned 
to  them.  "The  greatest  compliment  I  ever  got  was  when  people 
would  say,  'When  I  go  to  war,  I  want  Lori  on  the  radio,'"  she  says. 
She  is  the  first  woman  in  the  history  of  the  Air  Force  to  command 
the 552nd Air Control Wing out of Tinker Air Force Base, one of the 
largest  wings  in  Air  Combat  Command  (the  wing  that flies  the 
AWACS airborne control aircraft—the fleet  of Boeing  707s with the 
huge  rotating  radar  dishes  on  top).  She  is  the  first  commander  of  a 
combat wing ever who didn't come up through the pilot ranks. She 
was  the  first  female  Weapons  School  instructor  to  teach  at  the  Air 
Force Fighter Weapons School, where the Air Force trains all its top 
guns. There,  she became the most celebrated teacher in the ranks—
winning  best  teacher  seven  classes  in  a  row.  She  is  the  first  female 
director of the Secretary of the Air Force and Chief of Staff of the Air 
Force  Executive  Action  Group.  In  2000,  the  chairman  of  the  Joint 
Chiefs  of  Staff  said  of  General  Robinson,  at  the  time  still  a  captain, 
that  she  singularly  influenced  his  ideas  on  airpower.  And  the  list 
goes on. 
By  any  measure,  General  Lori  Robinson  is  a  remarkable  leader. 
Some  in  management  positions  operate  as  if  they  are  in  a  tree  of 
monkeys. They make sure that everyone at the top of  the tree look-
ing  down  sees  only  smiles.  But  all  too  often,  those  at  the  bottom 
looking  up  see  only  asses.  Great  leaders  like  General  Robinson  are 
respected  by  those  both  above  and  below.  Those  in  her  command 
trust  her  implicitly  because  they  know  she's  committed  to  looking 
after  them.  "There's  nothing  you  can  do  that  I  can't  fix,"  she  was 
often  heard  telling  students  at  Fighter  Weapons  School.  And  those 
to  whom  she  reports  show  remarkable  deference  to  her.  "I  don't 
know  how  she  gets  away  with  half  the  stuff  she  does,"  say  those 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
121 
who  know  her.  More  importantly,  it  is  said  with  a  grin  and  with 
respect.  General  Robinson's  ability  to  lead  developed  not  because 
she's  the  smartest  or  the  nicest.  She's  a  great  leader  because  she 
understands  that  earning  the  trust  of  an  organization  doesn't  come 
from  setting  out  to  impress  everyone,  it  comes  from  setting  out  to 
serve those who serve her. It is the invisible trust that gives a leader 
the  following  they  need  to  get  things  done.  And  in Lori  Robinson's 
case, things get done. 
I use the military because it exaggerates the point. Trust matters. 
Trust  comes  from  being  a  part  of  a  culture  or  organization  with  a 
common set of values and beliefs. Trust is maintained when the val-
ues  and  beliefs  are  actively  managed.  If  companies do  not  actively 
work to keep their  Golden  Circle in balance—clarity,  discipline and 
consistency—then  trust  starts  to  break  down.  A  company,  indeed 
any organization, must work actively to remind everyone WHY the 
company  exists.  WHY  it  was  founded  in  the  first  place.  What  it 
believes. They need to hold everyone in the company accountable to 
the values and guiding principles. It's not enough to just write them 
on  the  wall—that's  passive.  Bonuses  and  incentives must  revolve 
around  them.  The  company  must  serve  those  whom  they  wish  to 
serve it. 
With  balance,  those  who  are  good  fits  can  trust  that  everyone  is 
on  board  for  the  same  reasons.  It's  also  the  only  way  that  each 
individual in the system can trust that others are acting to "leave the 
organization  in  a  better  way  than  we  found  it,"  to quote  General 
Robinson  again.  This  is  the  root  of  passion.  Passion  comes  from 
feeling  like  you  are  a  part  of  something  that  you  believe  in,  some-
thing  bigger  than  yourself.  If  people  do  not  trust that  a  company  is 
organized to advance the WHY, then the passion is diluted. Without 
managed  trust,  people  will  show  up  to  do  their  jobs  and  they  will 
worry   primarily   about   themselves.   This   is   the   root of   office 
politics—people  acting  within  the  system  for  self-gain  often  at  the 

START WITH WHY 
122 
expense of others, even the company. If a company doesn't manage 
trust, then those working for it will not trust the company, and self-
interest  becomes  the  overwhelming  motivation.  This may  be  good 
for  the  short  term,  but  over  time  the  organization will  get  weaker 
and weaker. 
Herb  Kelleher,  the  visionary  behind  Southwest  Airlines,  under-
stood  this  better  than  most.  He  recognized  that  to get  the  best  out 
his employees he needed to create an environment in which they felt 
like  the  company  cared  about  them.  He  knew  that  they  would 
naturally  excel  if  they  felt  the  work  they  did  made  a  difference. 
When a journalist asked Kelleher who comes first to him, his share-
holders  or  his  employees,  his  response  was  heresy  at  the  time  (and 
to  a  large  degree  still  is).  "Well,  that's  easy,"  he  said,  "employees 
come  first  and  if  employees  are  treated  right,  they  treat  the  outside 
world  right,  the  outside  world  uses  the  company's  product  again, 
and that makes the shareholders happy. That really is the way that it 
works and it's not a conundrum at all." 
 
The influence of Others 
Whom  do  you  trust  more,  someone  you  know  or  someone  you 
don't  know?  What  do  you  trust  more,  a  claim  made  in  a  piece  of 
advertising or a recommendation from a friend? Whom do you trust 
more,  the  waiter  who  tells  you,  "Everything  on  the menu  is  great," 
or the waiter who tells you to avoid the chicken casserole? Are these 
questions  too  easy?  Then  how  about  this  one:  why  should  anyone 
trust you? 
Personal  recommendations  go  a  long  way.  We  trust  the  judg-
ment of others. It's part of the fabric of strong cultures. But we don't 
trust the judgment of just anyone. We are more likely to trust those 
who  share  our  values  and  beliefs.  When  we  believe  someone  has 
our  best  interest  in  mind  because  it  is  in  their  benefit  to  do  so,  the 
whole  group  benefits.  The  advancements  of  societies  were  based  a 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
123 
great  deal  on  the  trust  between  those  with  a  common  set  of  values 
and beliefs. 
The  feeling  of  trust  is  lodged  squarely  in  the  same  place  as  the 
WHY—the  limbic  brain—and  it's  often  powerful  enough  to  trump 
empirical research, or at least seed doubt. This is the reason why so 
many  manipulations  are  effective;  we  believe  that, for  better  or 
worse, others know more than we do. Clearly, four out of five den-
tists  know  more  than  us  when  choosing  chewing  gum  (but  what 
about the one holdout . . . what did he know that the others didn't?). 
Of  course  we  trust  the  celebrity  endorsement.  Those  celebs  are  rich 
and  can  use  any  product  they  want.  It  must  be  good if  they  are 
putting their reputation on the line to promote it, right? 
You  probably  answered  that  question  in  your  head  already. 
Clearly  they  are  endorsing  the  product  because  they  are  getting 
paid   to.   But   if   celebrity   endorsements   didn't   work,   companies 
wouldn't  use  them.  Or  perhaps  it's  the  fear  that  they  "might"  work 
that fuels the million-dollar wink and a smile that encourages us to 
choose one car over another or one lipstick over another. The fact is, 
none  of  us  is  immune  to  the  effect  of  someone  we  know  or feel like 
we trust influencing our decisions. 
Celebrity  endorsements  are  used  with  this  concept  in  mind.  By 
using  a  recognizable  face  or  name,  so  the  assumption  goes,  people 
will  more  likely  trust  the  claims  being  made.  The  flaw  in  this 
assumption  is  that  celebrity  status  alone  may  work to  influence 
behavior,  but  at  this  level  it's  just  peer  pressure.  For  it  to  work,  the 
celebrity  needs  to  represent  some  clear  cause  or  belief.  An  athlete 
known for  her work ethic  may have some value to a  company with 
the  same  belief,  for  example.  Or  an  actor  known  for  his  charitable 
work  would  be  good  fit  for  a  company  known  for  doing  good.  In 
these  cases,  it  is  clear  that  both  the  company  and the  celebrity  are 
working  together  to  advance  the  same  cause.  I  recently  saw  an  ad 
for  TD  Ameritrade  that  featured  morning  show  hosts Regis  Philbin 

START WITH WHY 
124 
and  Kelly  Ripa.  I'm  still  trying  to  figure  out  the cause  that  two  talk 
show  hosts  represent  and  how  that  matters  when  it  comes  to 
choosing  one  bank  over  another.  When  a  company  says  that  a 
celebrity represents "the kind of qualities we want our customers to 
associate  with  us,"  they  miss  the  point.  The  celebrity  is  another 
WHAT  to  the  company's  WHY.  The  celebrity  must  embody  the 
qualities that already exist at the company. Without clarity of WHY 
first, any benefit will amount to simply increasing recognition. 
So  many  decisions  (and  indeed  contract  negotiations)  are  based 
on   an   advertising   industry   measurement   called   a   Q-score—a 
quotient of how well recognized a celebrity is, how famous they are, 
so  to  speak.  The  higher  the  score,  the  better  the  unaided  awareness 
of  the  celebrity.  This  information  alone  is  not  enough.  The  clearer 
the spokesperson's own WHY is understood, the better ambassador 
they  can  be  for  a  like-minded  brand  or  company.  But  there  is  no 
measurement of a celebrity's WHY currently available, so the result 
is  obvious.  The  value  of  too  many  celebrity  endorsements  is  the 
celebrity appeal alone. Unless the audience to  which  you are trying 
to  appeal  gets  a  sense  of  what  that  spokesperson  believes,  unless 
that  spokesperson  is  "one  of  us,"  the  enforcement  may  drive  recog-
nition,  it  may  even  drive  sales  for  the  short  term,  but  it  will  fail  to 
build trust. 
A  trusted  recommendation  is  powerful  enough  to  trump  facts 
and  figures  and  even  multimillion-dollar  marketing budgets.  Think 
of  the  young  father  who  wants  to  do  everything  right  for  his  new-
born child. He decides he's going to get a new car—something safe, 
something  to  protect  his  child.  He  spends  a  week  reading  all  the 
magazines and reports, he's seen all the advertising and decides that 
on  Saturday  he's  buying  a  Volvo.  The  facts  are  in  and  his  mind  is 
made  up.  Friday  night  he  and  his  wife  head  to  a  dinner  party. 
Standing  by  the  punch  bowl  is  their  friend  the  local  car  enthusiast. 
Our   intrepid   new   father   walks   up   to   his   friend   and proudly 

THE EMERGENCE OF TRUST 
125 
announces that, as a new father, he's decided to buy a Volvo. With-
out a thought his friend replies, "Why would you do that? Mercedes 
is the safest car on the road. If you care about  your  kid, you'll  get a 
Mercedes." 
Playing  on  his  desires  to  be  a  good  father,  but  also  trusting  his 
friend's  opinion,  one  of  three  things  will  happen. Our  young  father 
will either change his mind and buy a Mercedes; he will go forward 
with   his   original   decision,   but   not   without   some   doubt   about 
whether he's indeed doing  the right  thing;  or he will  go back  to  the 
drawing  board  to  redo  all  his  research  in  order  to reassure  himself 
of his decision. No matter  how much rational information he  has at 
his  fingertips,  unless  that  decision  also  feels  right,  stress  will  go  up 
and confidence  will go down.  However you  slice  it, the opinions  of 
others matter. And the opinions of those we trust matter most. 
The  question  isn't  how  should  car  companies  talk  to  the  father 
who  bought  the  car.  The  question  isn't  even  how  they  court  the 
highly  influential  opinion  of  his  friend,  the  car  guy.  The  concept  of 
buyer  and  influencers  isn't  a  new  one.  The  question  is,  how  do  you 
get enough of the influencers to talk about you so that you can make 
the system tip? 
 

 
126 

 
127 
7 
 
HOW A TIPPING POINT TIPS 
If  I  told  you  I  knew  of  a  company  that  invented  an amazing  new 
technology  that  will  change  the  way  we  consume  TV, would  that 
pique  your  interest?  Perhaps  you'd  be  interested  in  buying  their 
product  or investing in their company.  It gets better.  They  have the 
single best product available. Their quality is through the roof, way 
better than anything else on the market. And their PR efforts have so 
been    remarkable,    they've    even    become    a    household    name. 
Interested? 
This  is  the  case  of  TiVo.  A  company  that  seemed  to have  every-
thing  going  for  them  but  turned  out  to  be  a  commercial  and  finan-
cial failure. Since they  seemed to have the recipe for  success, TiVo's 
flop defied conventional wisdom. Their struggles, however, are eas-
ily  understood  if  you  consider  that  they  thought  WHAT  they  did 

START WITH WHY 
128 
mattered  more  than  WHY.  They  also  ignored  the  Law  of  Diffusion 
of Innovations. 
In  2000,  Malcolm  Gladwell  created  his  own  tipping  point  when 
he shared with us how tipping points happen in business and in so-
ciety. In his aptly named book The Tipping Point, Gladwell identifies 
groups of necessary populations he calls connectors and influencers. 
With  little  doubt  Gladwell's  ideas  are  spot-on.  But  it  still  begs  the 
question,   why   should   an   influencer   tell   anyone   about   you? 
Marketers  are  always  trying  to  influence  the  influencers,  but  few 
really  know  how.  We  can't  dispute  that  tipping  points  happen  and 
the  conditions  that  Gladwell  articulates  are  right,  but  can  a  tipping 
point   happen   intentionally?   They   can't   just   be   an   accidental 
phenomenon.  If  they  exist,  then  we  should  be  able  to  design  one, 
and if we can design one, we should be able to design one that lasts 
beyond  the  initial  tip.  It's  the  difference  between  a  fad  and  an  idea 
that changes an industry or society forever. 
In  his  1962  book Diffusion of Innovations,  Everett  M.  Rogers  was 
the  first  to  formally  describe  how  innovations  spread  through  so-
ciety.  Thirty  years  later,  in  his  book  Crossing  the  Chasm,  Geoffrey 
Moore  expanded  on  Rogers's  ideas  to  apply  the  principle  to  high-
tech  product  marketing.  But  the  Law  of  Diffusion  of  Innovations 
explains  much  more  than  just  the  spread  of  innovation  or  technol-
ogy. It explains the spread of ideas. 
If  you  don't  know  the  law,  you're  likely  already  familiar  with 
some  of  its  terminology.  Our  population  is  broken  into  five  seg-
ments  that  fall  across  a  bell  curve:  innovators,  early  adoptors,  early 
majority, late majority and laggards. 

HOW A TIPPING POINT TIPS 
129 
 
As  the  law  states,  the  first  2.5  percent  of  the  population  are  the 
innovators, and the next 13.5 percent are early adopters. Innovators, 
Moore  says,  pursue  new  products  or  ideas  aggressively  and  are 
intrigued  by  any  fundamental  advance;  being  first  is  a  central  part 
of  their  lives.  As  their  name  suggests,  innovators are  the  small  per-
centage  of  the  population  that  challenges  the  rest of  us  to  see  and  ! 
think of the world a little differently. 
Early  adopters  are  similar  to  innovators  in  that  they  appreciate 
the  advantages  wrought  by  new  ideas  or  technologies.  They  are 
early  to  recognize  the  value  of  new  ideas  and  are  quite  willing  to 
put  up  with  imperfection  because  they  can  see  the  potential.  Al-
though quick to see the potential and willing to take risks to try new 
technologies or ideas, early adopters are not idea generators like the 
innovators. But both groups are similar, as Moore says, in that they 
rely heavily on their intuition. They trust their gut. 
Early adopters, like innovators but to a lesser degree, are willing 
to  pay  a  premium  or  suffer  some  level  of  inconvenience  to  own  a 
product or espouse an idea that feels right. Those on the left side of 
the diffusion curve are the ones who stood in line for six hours to be 
among  the  first  to  buy  the  iPhone,  Apple's  entry  into  the  mobile 
phone  market,  even  though  they  could  have  walked  into  a  store  a 
week  later  and  bought  one  without  waiting.  Their  willingness  to 
suffer an inconvenience or  pay a premium  had less to do  with how 
 

START WITH WHY 
130 
great the product  was and  more to do with their own sense of  who 
they are. They wanted to be the first. 
These  are  also  the  personality  types  who  bought  flat-screen  TVs 
when they first came out even though they cost upwards of $40,000 
and the technology  was still far from perfect. My friend Nathan fits 
this  profile.  I  walked  around  his  house  once  and  counted  no  fewer 
than  twelve  Bluetooth  earpieces  for  his  mobile  phone  lying  around 
his house. I asked him  why he had so  many. "Did they all break?" I 
queried.  "No,"  he  replied,  "they  came  out  with  a  new  one."  (There 
were  also  about  five  laptops,  various  models  of  BlackBerry  smart 
phones  and  boxes  of  other  gadgets  lying  about  that never  quite 
worked that well.) Nathan is an early adopter. 
The next 34 percent of the  population are the early  majority, fol-
lowed  by  the  late  majority,  and  finally  the  laggards  on  the  far  right 
side  of  the  spectrum.  Laggards  are  the  ones  who  buy  touchtone 
phones  only  because  they  don't  make  rotary  phones  anymore.  The 
early   and   late   majority   are   more   practical-minded. For   them, 
rational  factors  matter  more.  The  early  majority  is  slightly  more 
comfortable  with  new  ideas  or  technologies,  while  the  late  majority 
is not. 
The  farther  right  you  go  on  the  curve,  the  more  you  will  en-
counter  the  clients  and  customers  who  may  need  what  you  have, 
but  don't  necessarily  believe  what  you  believe.  As clients,  they  are 
the  ones  for  whom,  no  matter  how  hard  you  work,  it's  never 
enough. Everything usually boils down to price with them. They are 
rarely loyal. They rarely give referrals and sometimes you may even 
wonder  out  loud  why  you  still  do  business  with  them.  "They  just 
don't  get  it,"  our  gut  tells  us.  The  importance  of identifying  this 
group  is  so  that  you  can  avoid  doing  business  with them.  Why 
invest good money and energy to go after people who, at the end of 
the  day,  will  do  business  with  you  anyway  if  you  meet  their 
practical  requirements  but  will  never  be  loyal  if  you  don't?  It's  not 

HOW A TIPPING POINT TIPS 
131 
too hard to recognize where people fall on the spectrum once you're 
in a relationship with them; the opportunity is to figure out which is 
which before you decide to work with them. 
We  all  sit  at  different  places  on  this  spectrum  depending  on  the 
product or idea. Most of us are fiercely loyal to certain products and 
ideas   at   various   times   and   demonstrate   left-side-of-the-curve 
behavior.  And  for  other  products  or  ideas  we  exhibit  right-side-of- 
the-curve  behavior.  When  we  sit  on  one  side  of  the spectrum,  we 
often  have  a  hard  time  understanding  those  on  the  other  side  be-
cause  their  behavior  doesn't  make  sense  to  us.  My  sister  is  an  early 
adopter  when  it  comes  to  fashion  trends,  whereas  I'm  firmly  in  the 
late  majority.  It  was  only  recently  that  I  finally caved  and  bought  a 
pair of overpriced designer blue jeans. I admit they look good, but I 
still  think  they  aren't  worth  the  money  and  I  can't  understand  why 
my sister thinks they are. 
In contrast, I'm an early adopter for  some technologies. I bought 
a  Blue-ray  DVD  player  before  they  had  perfected  the  technology.  I 
paid about four or five times more for it compared to a regular DVD 
player.  My  sister  can't  understand  why  I  waste  my  money  on  all 
that  "useless  stuff,"  as  she  puts  it.  We  will  never  see  eye  to  eye  on 
this stuff. 
Each  of  us  assigns  different  values  to  different  things  and  our 
behaviors  follow  accordingly.  This  is  one  of  the  major  reasons  why 
it  is  nearly  impossible  to  "convince"  someone  of  the  value  of  your 
products  or  ideas  based  on  rational  arguments  and  tangible  bene-
fits.  It's  the  old  Ferrari  and  Honda  Odyssey  debate  again.  Designer 
jean  companies  (or  my  sister)  can  talk  to  me  until they  are  blue  in 
the   face   about   the   importance   of   fabric   quality,   design   and 
workmanship—it goes in one ear and out the other. Similarly, it can 
be  proven,  beyond  a  shadow  of  doubt,  the  rational  benefits  of 
choosing a $500 DVD player over a $100 one; my sister won't hear a 
word  of  it.  And  so  the  game  of  manipulation  ensues.  Again,  al-

START WITH WHY 
132 
though always effective, manipulations don't breed loyalty and they 
increase costs and stress for all parties involved. 
Most people or organizations that have something to sell, be it a 
product, service or idea, hope to achieve some level of mass- market 
success  or  acceptance.  Most  hope  to  penetrate  the  bell  of  the  curve. 
Getting  there,  however,  is  easier  said  than  done.  When  you  ask 
small  businesses  about  their  goals,  many  of  them  will  tell  you  they 
want to be a billion-dollar business in X number of years. The odds 
of that happening, unfortunately, don't look good. Of the 27 million 
businesses  registered  in  the  United  States,  fewer  than  2,000  ever 
reach  a  billion  dollars  in  annual  revenues.  And  99.9  percent  of  all 
businesses  in  America  have  fewer  than  500  employees.  In  other 
words, mass-market success is really hard to achieve. 
Big  companies  have  similar  challenges  repeating  their  mass- 
market  success.  Just  because  they've  done  it  once  or  twice  doesn't 
mean  they  know  how  to  do  it  every  time.  The  Zune,  Microsoft's 
entry  into  the  multigigabyte  mp3  player  market,  for  example,  was 
pegged to "take on the iPod." It didn't happen. Even if the quality is 
superior,  there  is  more  to  succeeding  than  just  the  product  and  the 
marketing.  Don't  forget,  the  superior  Betamax  technology  did  not 
beat out the substandard VHS technology as the standard format for 
videotape  in  the  1980s.  The  best  does  not  always  win.  Like  any 
natural  law,  the  Law  of  Diffusion  must  be  considered  if  mass- 
market  acceptance  is  important  to  you.  Refusal  to  do  so  will  cost  a 
lot  of  money  and  may  result  in  a  mediocre  success, if  not  complete 
failure. 
There is an irony to mass-market success, as it turns out. It's near 
impossible  to  achieve  if  you  point  your  marketing  and  resources  to 
the  middle  of  the  bell,  if  you  attempt  to  woo  those  who  represent 
the middle of the curve without first appealing to the early adopters. 
It  can  be  done,  but  at  massive  expense.  This  is  because  the  early 
majority, according to Rogers, will not try something until someone 

HOW A TIPPING POINT TIPS 
133 
else  has  tried  it  first.  The  early  majority,  indeed  the  entire  majority, 
need   the   recommendation   of   someone   else   who   has   already 
sampled the product or service. They need to know someone else has 
tested it. They need that trusted, personal recommendation. 
According to the Law of Diffusion, mass-market success can only 
be achieved after you penetrate between 15 percent to 18 percent of 
the  market.  That's  because  the  early  majority  won't  try  something 
new  until  someone  else  has  tried  it  first.  This  is why  we  have  to 
drop  our  price  or  offer  value-added  services.  We're  attempting  to 
reduce the risk tolerance of these practical-minded people until they 
feel  comfortable  to  buy.  That's  what  a  manipulation  is.  They  may 
buy, but they won't be loyal. Don't forget, loyalty is when people are 
willing  to  suffer  some  inconvenience  or  pay  a  premium  to  do 
business  with  you.  They  may  even  turn  down  a  better  offer  from 
someone  else—something  the  late  majority  rarely  does.  The  ability 
to get the system to tip is the point at which the growth of a business 
or the spreading of an idea starts to  move at an extraordinary pace. 
It  is  also  at  this  point  that  a  product  gains  mass-market  acceptance. 
The  point  at   which  an   idea  becomes  a  movement.  When  that 
happens,  the  growth  is  not  only  exponential,  it  is automatic.  It  just 
goes. 
The  goal  of  business  then  should  not  be  to  simply  sell  to  anyone 
who wants what you have—the majority—but rather to find people 
who  believe  what  you  believe,  the  left  side  of  the bell  curve.  They 
perceive  greater  value  in  what  you  do  and  will  happily  pay  a 
premium  or  suffer  some  sort  of  inconvenience  to  be a  part  of  your 
cause. They are the ones who, on their  own volition,  will tell others 
about  you.  That  15  to  18  percent  is  not  made  up  of people  who  are 
simply  willing  to  buy  the  product.  It  is  the  percentage  of  people 
who  share  your  beliefs  and  want  to  incorporate  your  ideas,  your 
products  and  your  services  into  their  own  lives  as WHATs  to  their 
own  WHYs.  They  look  to  WHAT  you  do  as  a  tangible  element  that 

START WITH WHY 
134 
demonstrates  their  own  purpose,  cause  or  belief  to the  outside 
world.  Their  willingness  to  pay  a  premium  or  suffer  inconvenience 
to  use  your  product  or  service  says  more  about  them  than  it  does 
about  you  and  your  products.  Their  ability  to  easily  see  WHY  they 
need to  incorporate your products  into their lives makes this  group 
the most loyal customers. They are also the most loyal shareholders 
and the most loyal employees. No matter where they sit in the spec-
trum,  these  are  the  people  who  not  only  love  you  but  talk  about 
you.  Get  enough  of  the  people  on  the  left  side  of  the  curve  on  your 
side and they encourage the rest to follow. 
I  love  asking  businesses  what  their  conversion  is  on  new  busi-
ness  efforts.  Many  answer  proudly,  "Ten  percent."  Even  if  you  ig-
nore  the  principles  of  The  Golden  Circle,  the  law  of  averages  says 
you  can  win  about  10  percent  of  the  business.  Throw  enough  spa-
ghetti  against  the  wall  and  some  of  it  sticks.  To  grow  the  business, 
all you need to do is more prospecting, which is why growing your 
business  by  aiming  at  the  middle  of  the  curve  is  so  expensive. 
Though  the  business  may  grow,  the  average  will  stay  about  the 
same, and 10 percent is not enough for the system to tip. 
Likewise,  10  percent  of  your  existing  customers  or clients  will 
naturally  show  loyalty  to  you.  But  why  are  they  so loyal?  Like  our 
inability  to  explain  why  we  love  our  spouses,  the  best  we  can  mus-
ter  up  to  explain  what  makes  them  such  great  clients  is,  "They  just 
get  it."  And  though  this  explanation  may  feel  right,  it  is  completely 
unactionable. How do you  get more people to "get it"? This is  what 
Moore  refers  to  as  the  "chasm,"  the  transition  between  the  early 
adopters and the early majority, and it's hard to cross. But not if you 
know WHY. 
If you have the discipline to focus on the early adopters, the majority 
will  come  along  eventually.  But  it  must  start  with WHY.  Simply 
focusing  on  so-called  influencers  is  not  enough.  The  challenge  is, 
which  influencers?  There  are  those  who  seem  to  fit the  influencer 

HOW A TIPPING POINT TIPS 
135 
profile  more  than  others,  but  in  reality  we  are  all  influencers  at 
different   times   for   different   reasons.   You   don't   just   want   any 
influencer, you want someone who believes  what you believe. Only 
then  will  they  talk  about  you  without  any  prompts  or  incentives.  If 
they  truly  believe  in  what  you  believe  and  if  they are  truly  on  the 
left side of the curve they won't need to be incentivized; they'll do it 
because they want to. The entire act of incentivizing an influencer is 
manipulative. It renders the influencer completely inauthentic to his 
or  her  group.  It  won't  take  long  for  the  group  to  find  out  that  a 
recommendation  wasn't   made  with  the  group's  best  interest  in 
mind,  but  rather  because  of  one  person's  self-interest.  Trust  erodes 
and the value of the influencer is rendered useless. 
Refusing to Consider the Law of Diffusion Will Cost You 
In  1997,  TiVo  was  racing  to  market  with  a  remarkable  new  device. 
Few would debate that from the time the product was introduced to 
the  present  day,  TiVo  has  had  the  single  highest-quality  product  in 
its  category.  The  company's  PR  has  been  extraordinary.  They  have 
achieved an unaided awareness that most brands can only dream of. 
They have become more than generic terms, like Kleenex, Band-Aids 
and Q-tips. In fact, they have been able to achieve more than generic 
status; they are a verb in the English language, "to TiVo." 
They  were  well  funded  with  venture  capital  and  had a  tech-
nology  that  could  truly  reinvent  how  we  consume  television.  The 
problem was, they marketed their technology directly to the middle 
of the bell curve. Seeing the mass-market appeal of the product, they 
ignored  the  principles  of  the  Law  of  Diffusion  and targeted  the 
masses. Compounding that bad aim, they attempted to appeal to the 
cynical  majority  by  explaining  WHAT  the  product  did  instead  of 
stating  WHY  the  company  or  the  product  existed  in  the  first  place. 
They attempted to convince with features and benefits. 
They basically said to the mass market: 

START WITH WHY 
136 
We've got a new product. 
It pauses live TV. 
Skips commercials. 
Rewinds live TV. 
Memorizes your viewing habits and records shows on your 
behalf without your needing to set it. 
Analysts  were  intrigued  by  the  prospects  of  TiVo  as  well  as  its 
competitor,  Replay,  a  well-funded  start-up  backed  by  venture  cap-
ital.  One  market  researcher  estimated  that  these  so-called  personal 
TV receivers would reach 760,000 subscribers by the end of the first 
year. 
TiVo  finally  shipped  in  1999.  Mike  Ramsay  and Jim  Barton,  two 
former  colleagues  who  had  founded  TiVo,  were  certain  the  TV- 
viewing  public  was  ready.  And  they  may  have  been  if  only  TiVo 
knew  how  to  talk  to  them.  But  despite  the  excitement  among  ana-
lysts  and  technophiles,  sales  were  hugely  disappointing.  TiVo  sold 
about 48,000 units the first year. Meanwhile, Replay, whose backers 
included  the  founders  of  Netscape,  failed  to  gain  a  following  and 
instead became embroiled in a dispute with the television networks 
over  the  way  it  allowed  viewers  to  skip  ads.  In  2000,  the  company 
adopted   a   new   strategy   and   a   few   months   later   was   sold   to 
SonicBlue, which later filed for bankruptcy. 
Analysts  were  stumped  as  to  why  the  TiVo  machines  weren't 
selling better. The company seemed to have everything going for it. 
After  all,  they  had  the  recipe  for  success:  a  great-quality  product, 
money and ideal market conditions. In 2002, after TiVo had been on 
the market nearly three years, a headline in Advertising Age summed 
it  up  best:  "More  U.S.  Homes  Have  Outhouses  than  TiVos."  (At  the 
time, there were 671,000 homes with outhouses in the United States, 
compared with 504,000 to 514,000 homes with TiVo.) Not only were 
sales  poor,  but  the  company  has  not  fared  well  for its  shareholders 
either.  At  the  time  of  the  initial  public  offering in  the  fall  of  1999, 

HOW A TIPPING POINT TIPS 
137 
TiVo stock traded at slightly over $40 per share. A few months later 
it hit its high at just over $50. The stock declined steadily for the rest 
of  the  year,  and  except  for  three  short  periods  since  2001,  it  has 
never since traded over $10. 
If  you  apply  the  principles  of  The  Golden  Circle,  the  answer  is 
clear—people  don't  buy  WHAT  you  do,  they  buy  WHY  you  do  it, 
and  TiVo  attempted  to  convince  consumers  to  buy  by telling  them 
only  WHAT  the  product  did.  Features  and  rational  benefits.  The 
practical-minded,    technophobic    mass    market's    response    was 
predictable.  "I  don't  understand  it.  I  don't  need  it.  I  don't  like  it. 
You're  scaring  me."  There  were  a  small  number  of  TiVo  loyalists, 
probably  about  10  percent,  those  who just  "got  it,"  who  didn't  need 
an  explicit  articulation  of  WHY.  They  exist  to  this  day,  but  there 
were  not  enough  of  them  to  create  the  tipping  point  that  TiVo 
needed and predicted. 
What TiVo should have done is talked about what they believed. 
They  should  have  talked  about  WHY  the  product  was  invented  in 
the  first  place,  and  then  ventured  out  to  share  their  invention  with 
the innovators and early adopters who believed what they believed. 
If they had started their sales pitch with WHY the product existed in 
the first place, the product itself would have become the proof of the 
higher cause—proof of WHY. If their  Golden Circle  was in balance, 
the  outcome  might  have  been  quite  different.  Compare  the  original 
list  of  features  and  benefits  with  a  revised  version  that  starts  with 
WHY: 
If you're the kind of person who likes to have total control of every 
aspect of your life, boy do we have a product for you. 
It pauses live TV. 
Skips commercials. 
Rewinds live TV. 

START WITH WHY 
138 
Memorizes your viewing habits and records shows on your behalf 
without you needing to set it. 
 
In  this  version,  all  the  features  and  rational  benefits  serve  as 
tangible  proof  of  WHY  the  product  exists  in  the  first  place,  not  the 
reasons  to  buy,  per  se.  The  WHY  is  the  belief  that drives  the 
decision,  and  WHAT  it  does  provides  us  a  way  to  rationalize  the 
appeal of the product. 
Confirming  their  failure  to  tap  the  right  segment  of  the  market, 
TiVo  offered  a  very  rational  explanation  of  what  was  happening. 
"Until  people  get  their  hands  on  it,"  Rebecca  Baer,  a  spokeswoman 
for  TiVo,  told  the New York Times  in  2000,  "they  don't  understand 
why  they  need  this."  If  this  line  of  logic  was  true,  then  no  new 
technology  would  ever  take  hold.  A  fact  that  is  patently  untrue. 
Though  Ms.  Baer  was  correct  about  the  mass  market's  failure  to 
understand the value, it was TiVo's failure to properly communicate 
and rally the left side of the bell curve to educate and encourage the 
adoption  that  was  the  reason  so  few  people  "got  their  hands  on  it." 
TiVo did not start with WHY. They ignored the left side of the curve 
and  completely  failed  to  find  the  tipping  point.  And  for  those 
reasons,  "people  didn't  get  their  hands  on  it,"  and  the  mass  market 
didn't buy it. 
Fast-forward  almost  a  decade.  TiVo  continues  to  have  the  best 
digital  video-recording  product  on  the  market.  Its unaided  aware-
ness  continues  to  be  through  the  roof.  Nearly  everyone  knows  now 
what the product is and what it does, yet the company's future is by 
no means secure. 
While  millions  of  viewers  may  say  they  "TiVo"  things  all  the 
time,  unfortunately  for  TiVo,  they  aren't  using  a  TiVo  system. 
Rather,  they  "TiVo"  shows  using  a  digital  video  recorder  provided 
by  the  cable  or  satellite  company.  Many  try  to  make  the  argument 
that   TiVo's   failure   was   due   to   the   cable   companies'   superior 

HOW A TIPPING POINT TIPS 
139 
distribution. But we know that people often go out of their way, pay 
a   premium   or   suffer   an   inconvenience   to   buy   a   product   that 
resonates  on  a  visceral  level  with  them.  Until  recently,  people  who 
wanted  a  custom  Harley-Davidson  motorcycle  waited  upwards  of 
six  months  to  a  year  to  take  delivery  of  their  product.  By  any 
standard, that's just bad service. Consumers could have just walked 
into a Kawasaki dealership and walked right  out  with a brand-new 
bike.  They  could  have  found  a  very  similar  model  with  similar 
power  and  maybe  even  for  less  money.  But  they  suffered  the 
inconvenience  willingly,  not  because  they  were  in  the  market  for  a 
motorcycle, but because they wanted a Harley. 
TiVo is not the first to ignore these sound principles and won't be 
the  last.  The  meager  success  of  satellite  radio  technology  like  Sirius 
or  XM  Radio  has  followed  a  similar  path.  They  offered  a  well-
publicized, well-funded new technology that attempted to convince 
users   with   a   promise   of   rational   features   and   benefits—no 
commercials  and  more  channels  than  the  competition.  Throw  in  an 
impressive   array   of   celebrity   endorsements,   including   rap   star 
Snoop  Dog  and  1970s  pop  icon  David  Bowie,  and  the  technology 
still didn't stick. When you start with WHY, those who believe what 
you  believe  are  drawn  to  you  for  very  personal  reasons.  It  is  those 
who share your values and beliefs, not the quality of your products, 
that  will  cause  the  system  to  tip.  Your  role  in  the  process  is  to  be 
crystal clear about  what purpose, cause  or belief you exist to cham-
pion,  and  to  show  how  your  products  and  services  help  advance 
that cause. Absent a WHY, new ideas and technologies quickly find 
themselves  playing  the  price-and-feature  game—a  sure  sign  of  an 
absence  of  WHY  and  a  slide  into  commodity  status.  It  is  not  the 
technology  that  failed,  it  was  how  the  companies  tried  to  sell  it. 
Satellite  radio  has  not  displaced  commercial  radio in  any  meaning-
ful way. Even when Sirius and XM merged, hoping the joined force 
of  their  companies  would  help  change  their  luck,  shares  for  the 

START WITH WHY 
140 
combined company sold for less than 50 cents apiece. And, last time 
I  checked,  XM  was  offering  a  discount,  a  promotion,  free  shipping 
and  a  claim  of  being  "America's  #1  satellite  radio service  with  over 
170 channels" to push their product. 
Give the People Something to Believe In 
On  August  28,  1963,  250,000  people  from  across  the country  de-
scended on the Mall in Washington, D.C., to hear Dr. Martin Luther 
King  Jr.  give  his  famous  "I  Have  a  Dream"  speech.  The  organizers 
didn't  send  out  250,000  invitations  and  there  was  no Web  site  to 
check  the  date.  How  did  they  get  a  quarter  of  a  million  people  to 
show up on the right day at the right time? 
During  the  early  1960s,  the  country  was  torn  apart by  racial 
tensions. There were riots in dozens of cities in 1963 alone. America 
was  a  country  scarred  by  inequality  and  segregation.  How  the  civil 
rights  movement  lifted  an  idea  that  all  men  are  created  equal  to 
become   a   movement   with   the   power   to   change   a   country   is 
grounded  in  the  principles  of  The  Golden  Circle  and  the  Law  of 
Diffusion. 
Dr.  King  was  not  the  only  person  alive  during  that time  who 
knew  WHAT  had  to  change  to  bring  about  civil  rights  in  America. 
He  had  many  ideas  about  WHAT  needed  to  happen,  but so  did 
others.  And  not  all  of  his  ideas  were  good.  He  was not  a  perfect 
man; he had his complexities. 
But Dr. King was absolute in his conviction. He knew change had 
to  happen  in  America.  His  clarity  of  WHY,  his  sense  of  purpose, 
gave him the strength and energy to continue his fight against often 
seemingly  insurmountable  odds.  There  were  others  like  him  who 
shared  his  vision  of  America,  but  many  of  them  gave  up  after  too 
many defeats. Defeat is painful. And the ability to continue head-on, 
day after day, takes something more than knowing what legislation 
needs to be passed. For civil rights to truly take hold in the country, 

HOW A TIPPING POINT TIPS 
141 
its  organizers  had  to  rally  everyone.  They  may  have  been  able  to 
pass  legislation,  but  they  needed  more  than  that,  they  needed  to 
change a country. Only if they could rally a nation to join the cause, 
not  because  they  had  to,  but  because  they  wanted  to,  could  any 
significant  change  endure.  But  no  one  person  can  effect  lasting 
change   alone.   It   would   take   others   who   believed   what   King 
believed. 
The  details  of  HOW  to  achieve  civil  rights  or  WHAT needed  to 
be  done  were  debatable,  and  different  groups  tried different  strate-
gies.  Violence  was  employed  by  some,  appeasement  by  others.  Re-
gardless  of  HOW  or  WHAT  was  being  done,  there  was  one  thing 
everyone had in common—WHY they were doing it. It was not just 
Martin  Luther  King's  unflappable  conviction  that  was  able  to  stir  a 
population, but his ability to put his WHY into words. Dr. King had 
a  gift.  He  talked  about  what  he  believed.  And  his  words  had  the 
power to inspire: 
"I believe." 
"I believe." 
"I believe." 
"There are two types of laws," he shared, "those that are just and 
those  that  are  unjust.  A  just  law,"  Dr.  King  expounded,  "is  a  man- 
made code that squares with the moral law. An unjust law is a code 
that is out of harmony with the moral law.... Any law that uplifts the 
human  personality  is  just.  Any  law  that  degrades  human  per-
sonality  is  unjust.  All  segregation  statutes  are  unjust  because  segre-
gation distorts the soul and damages the personality." His belief was 
bigger  than  the  civil  rights  movement.  It  was  about  all  of  mankind 
and  how  we  treat  each  other.  Of  course,  his  WHY  developed  as  a 
result  of  the  time  and  place  in  which  he  was  born  and  the  color  of 
his  skin,  but  the  civil  rights  movement  served  as  the  ideal  platform 
for Dr. King to bring his WHY, his belief in equality, to life. 

START WITH WHY 
142 
People  heard  his  beliefs  and  his  words  touched  them  deep  in-
side.  Those  who  believed  what  he  believed  took  that  cause  and 
made  it  their  own.  And  they  told  people  what  they  believed.  And 
those people told  others what they believed. Some organized to get 
that belief out more efficiently. 
And in the summer of 1963, a quarter of a million people showed 
up to hear Dr. King deliver his "I Have a Dream" speech on the steps 
of the Lincoln Memorial. 
But how many people showed up for Dr. King? 
Zero. 
They  showed  up  for  themselves.  It  was  what they  believed.  It  was 
what they  saw  as  an  opportunity  to  help  America  become  a  better 
version  of  itself.  It  was they  who  wanted  to  live  in  a  country  that 
reflected their own values and beliefs that inspired them to get on a 
bus  to  travel  for  eight  hours  to  stand  in  the  Washington  sun  in  the 
middle of August to hear Dr. King speak. Being in Washington was 
simply  one  of  the  things  they  did  to  prove  what  they  believed. 
Showing  up  that  day  was  one  of  the  WHATs  to  their  own  WHY. 
This was a cause and it was their cause. 
Dr. King's speech itself served as a visceral reminder of the belief 
shared by everyone who stood there listening. And that speech was 
about what he believed, not how they  were going  to do it. He gave 
the "I Have a Dream" speech, not the "I Have a Plan" speech. It was 
a statement of purpose and not a comprehensive twelve- point plan 
to  achieving  civil  rights  in  America.  Dr.  King  offered  America  a 
place  to  go,  not  a  plan  to  follow.  The  plan  had  its  place,  but  not  on 
the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. 
Dr.  King's  articulation  of  his  belief  was  something  powerful 
enough  to  rally  those  who  shared  that  belief  even  if  they  weren't 
personally  affected  by  the  inequalities.  Nearly  a  quarter  of  the  peo-
ple who came to the rally that day were white. This was a belief not 
about  black  America,  this  was  a  belief  about  a  shared  America.  Dr. 

HOW A TIPPING POINT TIPS 
143 
King  was  the  leader  of  a  cause.  A  cause  for  all  those  who  believed 
what he believed regardless of skin color. 
It wasn't the details of his plans that earned him the right to lead. 
It  was  what  he  believed  and  his  ability  to  communicate  it  clearly 
that  people  followed.  In  essence,  he,  like  all  great  leaders,  became 
the  symbol  of  the  belief.  Dr.  King  came  to  personify  the  cause.  To 
this  day  we  build  statues  of  him  to  keep  that  belief  alive  and 
tangible.  People  followed  him  not  because  of  his  idea  of  a  changed 
America.  People  followed  him  because  of  their  idea  of  a  changed 
America.  The  part  of  the  brain  that  influences  our behavior  and 
decisions does  not have the capacity for language. We have trouble 
saying  clearly,  in  emotional  terms,  why  we  do  what we  do,  and 
offer  rationalizations  that,  though  valid  and  true,  are  not  powerful 
enough  to  inspire  others.  So  when  asked  why  they  showed  up  that 
day,   people   pointed   to   Dr.   King   and   said   simply,   "Because   I 
believe." 
More  than  anything  else,  what  Martin  Luther  King  Jr.  gave  us 
was clarity, a way to explain how we felt. He gave us the words that 
inspired  us.  He  gave  us  something  to  believe  in,  something  we 
could  easily  share  with  our  friends.  Everyone  at  the  Mall  that  day 
shared  a  set  of  values  and  beliefs.  And  everyone  there  that  day,  re-
gardless  of  skin  color  or  race  or  sex,  trusted  each  other.  It  was  that 
trust, that common bond, that shared belief that fueled a movement 
that would change a nation. 
We believed. 
We believed. 
We believed 

 
144 
. 
 

 
145 
 
PART 4 
 
HOW TO 
RALLY THOSE 
WHO BELIEVE 
 

 
146 

 
147 
 
8 
 
START WITH WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
Energy Excites. Charisma Inspires. 
RAH!!!! With a roar, Steve Ballmer, the man who replaced Bill Gates 
as CEO  of Microsoft, bursts onto the stage of the company's annual 
global  summit  meeting.  Ballmer  loves  Microsoft—he  says  so  in  no 
uncertain  words.  He  also  knows  how  to  pump  up  a  crowd.  His 
energy is almost folkloric. He pumps his fists and runs from one end 
of the stage to the other, he screams and he sweats. He is remarkable 
to  watch  and  the  crowd  loves  it.  As  Ballmer  proves,  without  a 
doubt, energy can motivate a crowd. But can it inspire a population? 
What happens the next day or the next week when Ballmer's energy 
is  not  there  to  motivate  his  employees?  Is  energy  enough  to  keep  a 
company of about 80,000 people focused? 

START WITH WHY 
148 
In  contrast,  Bill  Gates  is  shy  and  awkward,  a  social  misfit.  He 
does  not  fit  the  stereotype  of  the  leader  of  a  multibillion-dollar 
corporation.  He  is  not  the  most  energetic  public  speaker.  When  Bill 
Gates  speaks,  however,  people  listen  with  bated  breath.  They  hang 
on  his  every  word.  When  Gates  speaks,  he  doesn't  rally  a  room,  he 
inspires  it.  Those  who  hear  him  take  what  he  says  and  carry  his 
words  with  them  for  weeks,  months  or  years.  Gates  doesn't  have 
energy, but Bill Gates inspires. 
Energy  motivates  but  charisma  inspires.  Energy  is  easy  to  see, 
easy to measure and easy to copy Charisma is hard to define, nearly 
impossible  to  measure  and  too  elusive  to  copy.  All great  leaders 
have charisma because all great leaders have clarity of WHY; and an 
undying belief in a purpose or cause bigger than themselves. It's not 
Bill  Gates's  passion  for  computers  that  inspires  us,  it's  his  undying 
optimism   that   even   the   most   complicated   problems   can   being 
solved. He believes  we can find ways to remove obstacles to ensure 
that  everyone  can  live  and  work  to  their  greatest  potential.  It  is  his
5 
optimism to which we are drawn. 
Living through the computer revolution, he saw the computer as 
a  perfect  technology  to  help  us  all  become  more  productive  and 
achieve our greatest potential. That belief inspired his vision of a, PC 
on  every  desk  to  come  to  life.  Ironic  considering  Microsoft  never 
even made PCs. It wasn't just WHAT computers did that; Gates saw 
the  impact  for  the  new  technology,  it  was  WHY  we  needed  them. 
Today,   the   work   he   does   with   the   Bill   and   Melinda   Gates 
Foundation has nothing to do with software, but it is another way he 
has  found  to  bring  his  WHY  to  life.  He  is  looking  for  ways  to  solve 
problems. He still has an undying belief. And he still: believes that if 
we can help people, this time those with less privilege, remove some 
seemingly  simple  obstacles,  then  they  too  will  have  an  opportunity 
to  be  more  productive  and  lift  themselves  up  to  achieve  their  great 

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
149 
potential.  For  Gates,  all  that  has  changed  is  WHAT he  is  doing  to 
bring his cause to life. 
Charisma  has  nothing  to  do  with  energy;  it  comes  from  a  clarity 
of  WHY.  It  comes  from  absolute  conviction  in  an  ideal  bigger  than 
oneself.  Energy,  in  contrast,  comes  from  a  good  night's  sleep  or  lots 
of   caffeine.   Energy   can   excite.   But   only   charisma   can   inspire. 
Charisma commands loyalty. Energy does not. 
Energy  can  always  be  injected  into  an  organization to  motivate 
people  to  do  things.  Bonuses,  promotions,  other  carrots  and  even  a 
few sticks can get people to work harder, for sure, but the gains are, 
like all manipulations, short-term. Over time, such tactics cost more 
money  and  increase  stress  for  employee  and  employer  alike,  and 
eventually  will  become  the  main  reason  people  show up  for  work 
every day. That's not loyalty. That's the employee version of repeat 
business.  Loyalty  among  employees  is  when  they  turn  down  more 
money  or  benefits  to  continue  working  at  the  same  company. 
Loyalty  to  a  company  trumps  pay  and  benefits.  And  unless  you're 
an astronaut, it's  not the  work  we do  that inspires us  either. It's the 
cause we come to work for. We don't want to come to work to build 
a wall, we want to come to work to build a cathedral. 
The Chosen Path 
Raised  in  Ohio,  sixty  miles  from  Dayton,  Neil  Armstrong  grew  up 
on  a  healthy  diet  of  stories  about  the  Wright  brothers.  From  a  very 
early  age  he  dreamed  of  flying.  He'd  make  model  airplanes,  read 
magazines about flying and stare at the heavens through a telescope 
mounted  on  the  roof  of  his  house.  He  even  got  his  pilot's  license 
before  he  got  his  driver's  license.  With  a  childhood  passion  that 
became  reality,  Armstrong  was  destined  to  become  an  astronaut. 
For  the  rest  of  us,  however,  our  careers  paths  are more  like  Jeff 
Sumpter's. 

START WITH WHY 
150 
While Sumpter was  in  high school, his  mother arranged for him 
to  get  a  summer  internship  at  the  bank  where  she  worked.  Four 
years  after  he  finished  high  school  he  called  the  bank  to  see  if  he 
could  do  some  part-time  work,  and  they  eventually  offered  him  a 
full-time  job.  Whamo,  Jeff's  got  a  career  as  a  banker.  In  fact,  after 
fifteen years in the industry he and a colleague by the name of Trey 
Maust  went  on  to  start  their  own  bank,  Lewis  &  Clark  Bank  in 
Portland, Oregon. 
Sumpter is very good at what he does—he's been one of the top-
performing  loan  officers  throughout  his  career.  He's  well  liked  and 
well  respected  among  his  colleagues  and  clients.  But  even  Jeff  will 
admit  that  he  doesn't  have  much  of  a  passion  for  banking,  per  se. 
Though he's not living out his childhood dream, he is passionate for 
something.  It's  not  WHAT  he  does  that  gets  him  out of  bed  every 
morning. It's WHY he does it. 
Our  career  paths  are  largely  incidental.  I  never  planned  to  be 
doing what I'm doing now. As a kid I wanted to be an aeronautical 
engineer, but in college I set my sights on becoming a criminal pros-
ecutor.  While  I  was  in  law  school,  however,  I  became  disillusioned 
with the idea of being a lawyer. It just didn't feel right. I was at law 
school  in  England,  where  the  law  is  one  of  the  last  truly  "English" 
professions; not wearing a pinstriped suit to an interview could hurt 
my chances of getting a job. This was not my cup of tea. 
I  happened  to  be  dating  a  young  woman  who  was  studying 
marketing  at  Syracuse  University.  She  could  see  what  inspired  me 
and what frustrated  me about the law and suggested I try my hand 
in  the  field.  And  whamo,  I'd  gotten  myself  a  new  career  in  market-
ing.  But  that's  just  one  of  the  things  I've  done—it's  not  my  passion 
and it's not how I define my life. My cause—to inspire people to do 
the things that inspire them—is WHY I get out of bed every day. The 
excitement is trying to find new ways, different WHATs to bring my 
cause to life, of which this book is one. 

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
151 
Regardless of WHAT we do in our lives, our WHY—our driving 
purpose,  cause  or  belief—never  changes.  If  our  Golden  Circle  is  in 
balance, WHAT we do is simply the tangible way we find to breathe 
life  into  that  cause.  Developing  software  was  merely  one  of  the 
things  Bill  Gates  did  to  bring  his  cause  to  life.  An  airline  gave  Herb 
Kelleher the  perfect outlet  to spread  his belief in freedom. Putting a 
man on the moon was one goal John F. Kennedy used to rally people 
to  bring  to  life  his  belief  that  service  to  the  nation—and  not  being 
serviced   by   the   nation—would   lead   America   to   advance   and 
prosper.  Apple  gave  Steve  Jobs  a  way  to  challenge  the  status  quo 
and do something  big  in the world. All the things  these charismatic 
leaders did were the tangible ways they found to bring their WHYs 
to life. But none of them could have imagined WHAT they would be 
doing when they were young. 
When a WHY is clear, those who share that belief will be drawn to it 
and  maybe  want  to  take  part  in  bringing  it  to  life.  If  that  belief  is 
amplified it can have the power to rally even more believers to raise 
their  hands  and  declare,  "I  want  to  help."  With  a  group  of  believers 
all  rallying  around  a  common  purpose,  cause  or  belief,  amazing 
things  can  happen.  But  it  takes  more  than  inspiration  to  do  become 
great.  Inspiration  only  starts  the  process;  you  need  something  more 
to drive a movement. 
Amplify the Source of Inspiration 
The  Golden  Circle  is  not  just  a  communication  tool;  it  also 
provides  some  insight  into  how  great  organizations are  organized. 
As we start to add dimension to the concept of The Golden Circle, it 
is no longer helpful to look at it as a purely two-dimensional model. 
If it is to provide any real value in how to build a great organization 
in our very three-dimensional world, The Golden Circle needs to be 
three-dimensional.  The  good  news  is,  it  is.  It  is, in  fact,  a  top-down 
view of a cone. Turn it on its side and you can see its full value. 

START WITH WHY 
152 
 
The    cone    represents    a    company    or    an    organization—an 
inherently  hierarchical  and  organized  system.  Sitting  at  the  top  of 
the  system,  representing  the  WHY,  is  a  leader;  in  the  case  of  a 
company, that's usually the CEO (or at least we hope it is). The next 
level down, the HOW level, typically includes the senior executives 
who  are  inspired  by  the  leader's  vision  and  know  HOW  to  bring  it 
to life. Don't forget that a WHY is just a belief, HOWs are the actions 
we take to realize that belief and WHATs are the results of those ac-
tions.  No  matter  how  charismatic  or  inspiring  the  leader  is,  if  there 
are  not  people  in  the  organization  inspired  to  bring  that  vision  to 
reality,  to  build  an  infrastructure  with  systems  and  processes,  then 
at best, inefficiency reigns, and at worst, failure results. 
In  this  rendering  the  HOW  level  represents  a  person  or  a  small 
group  responsible  for  building  the  infrastructure  that  can  make  a 
WHY tangible. That may happen in marketing, operations, finance, 
human  resources  and  all  the  other  C-suite  departments.  Beneath 
that, at the WHAT level, is where the rubber meets the road. It is at 
this  level  that  the  majority  of  the  employees  sit  and  where  all  the 
tangible stuff actually happens. 
I Have a Dream (and He's Got the Plan) 
Dr.  King  said  he  had  a  dream,  and  he  inspired  people  to  make 
his  dream  their  own.  What  Ralph  Abernathy  lent  the movement 
 

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
153 
was  something  else:  he  knew  what  it  would  take  to  realize  that 
dream,  and  he  showed  people  HOW  to  do  it.  He  gave  the  dream 
structure.  Dr.  King  spoke  about  the  philosophical  implications  of 
the  movement,  while  Abernathy,  Dr.  King's  onetime  mentor,  long-
time  friend  and  financial  secretary  and  treasurer  of  the  Southern 
Christian  Leadership  Conference,  would  help  people understand 
the specific steps they needed to take. "Now," Abernathy would tell 
the  audience  following  a  rousing  address  by  Dr.  King,  "let  me  tell 
you what that means for tomorrow morning." 
Dr.  Martin  Luther  King  Jr.  was  the  leader,  but  he  didn't  change 
America alone. Though Dr. King inspired the movement, to actually 
move  people  requires  organizing.  As  is  the  case  with  almost  all 
great  leaders,  there  were  others  around  Dr.  King  who  knew  better 
HOW to do that. For every great leader, for every WHY-type, there 
is  an  inspired  HOW-type  or  group  of  HOW-types  who  take  the 
intangible  cause  and  build  the  infrastructure  that can  give  it  life. 
That  infrastructure  is  what  actually  makes  any  measurable  change 
or success possible. 
The  leader  sits  at  the  top  of  the  cone—at  the  start,  the  point  of 
WHY—while  the  HOW-types  sit  below  and  are  responsible  for  ac-
tually  making  things  happen.  The  leader  imagines  the  destination 
and  the  HOW-types  find  the  route  to  get  there.  A  destination 
without  a  route  leads  to  meandering  and  inefficiency,  something  a 
great many WHY-types will experience without the help of others to 
ground  them.  A  route  without  a  destination,  however,  may  be 
efficient,  but  to  what  end?  It's  all  fine  and  good to  know  how  to 
drive,  but  it's  more  fulfilling  when  you  have  a  place  to  go.  For  Dr. 
King, Ralph Abernathy was one of those he inspired and who knew 
HOW to make the cause actionable and tangible. "Dr. King's job was 
to   interpret   the   ideology   and   theology   of   non-violence,"   said 
Abernathy.  "My  job  was  more  simple  and  down-to-earth.  I  would 
tell [people], 'Don't ride those buses."' 

START WITH WHY 
154 
In  every  case  of  a  great  charismatic  leader  who  ever  achieved 
anything  of  significance,  there  was  always  a  person  or  small  group 
lurking  in  the  shadows  who  knew  HOW  to  take  the  vision  and 
make it a reality. Dr. King had a dream. But no matter how inspiring 
a dream may be, a dream that cannot come to life stays a dream. Dr. 
King dreamed of many of the same things as countless other African 
Americans  who  grew  up  in  the  pre-civil  rights  South.  He  spoke  of 
many  of  the  same  themes.  He  felt  the  same  outrage  perpetrated  by 
an  unjust  system.  But  it  was  King's  unflappable  optimism  and  his 
words that inspired a population. 
Dr.  King  didn't  change  America  by  himself.  He  wasn't  a  legisla-
tor, for example, but legislation was created to give all people in the 
United States equal rights regardless of skin color. It wasn't Dr. King 
who  changed  America;  it  was  the  movement  of  millions  of  others 
whom  he  inspired  that  changed  the  course  of  history.  But  how  do 
you  organize  millions  of  people?  Forget  millions,  how  do  you 
organize hundreds or tens of people? The vision and charisma of the 
leader  are  enough  to  attract  the  innovators  and  the  early  adopters. 
Trusting  their  guts  and  their  intuition,  these  people  will  make  the 
greatest sacrifices to help see the vision become a reality. With each 
success,  with  every  tangible  demonstration  that  the  vision  can  in 
fact  become  reality,  the  more  practical-minded  majority  starts  to 
take  interest.  What  was  previously  just  a  dream  soon  becomes  a 
provable  and  tangible  reality.  And  when  that  happens,  a  tipping 
point can be reached and then things really get moving. 
Those Who Know WHY Need Those Who Know HOW 
The  pessimists  are  usually  right,  to  paraphrase  Thomas  Friedman, 
author  of  The  World  Is  Flat,  but  it's  the  optimists  who  change  the 
world.  Bill  Gates  imagined  a  world  in  which  the  computer  could 
help  us  all  reach  our  greatest  potential.  And  it  happened.  Now  he 
imagines  a  world  in  which  malaria  does  not  exist.  And  it  will  hap-

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
155 
pen.  The  Wright  brothers  imagined  a  world  in  which we'd  all  take 
to  the  skies  as  easily  as  we  catch  the  bus.  And  it happened.  WHY- 
types have the power to change the course of industries or even the 
world ... if only they knew HOW. 
WHY-types  are  the  visionaries,  the  ones  with  the  overactive 
imaginations.  They  tend  to  be  optimists  who  believe  that  all  the 
things  they  imagine  can  actually  be  accomplished.  HOW-types  live 
more  in  the  here  and  now.  They  are  the  realists  and  have  a  clearer 
sense  of  all  things  practical.  WHY-types  are  focused  on  the  things 
most  people  can't  see,  like  the  future.  HOW-types  are  focused  on 
things   most  people  can   see  and  tend  to  be  better  at  building 
structures  and  processes  and  getting  things  done.  One  is  not  better 
than the other, they are just different ways people naturally see and 
experience  the  world.  Gates  is  a  WHY-type.  So  were the  Wright 
brothers.  And  Steve  Jobs.  And  Herb  Kelleher.  But  they  didn't  do  it 
alone. They couldn't. They needed those who knew HOW. 
"If it hadn't been for  my big brother, I'd have been  in jail several 
times  for  checks  bouncing,"  said  Walt  Disney,  only half joking,  to  a 
Los Angeles audience in 1957. "I never knew what was in the bank. 
He  kept  me  on  the  straight  and  narrow."  Walt  Disney  was  a  WHY- 
type,  a  dreamer  whose  dream  came  true  thanks  to  the  help  of  his 
more sensible older brother Roy, a HOW-type. 
Walt  Disney  began  his  career  creating  cartoon  drawings  for  ad-
vertisements, but moved quickly to making animated movies. It was 
1923  and  Hollywood  was  emerging  as  the  heart  of  the  movie 
business, and Walt wanted to be part of it. Roy, who was eight years 
older,  had  been  working  at  a  bank.  Roy  was  always  in  awe  of  his 
brother's  talent  and  imagination,  but  he  also  knew that  Walt  was 
prone  to  taking  risks  and  to  neglecting  business  affairs.  Like  all 
WHY  guys,  Walt  was  busy  thinking  about  what  the  future  looked 
like  and  often  forget  he  was  living  in  the  present.  "Walt  Disney 
dreamed,  drew  and  imagined,  Roy  stayed  in  the  shadow,  forming 

START WITH WHY 
156 
an  empire,"  wrote  Bob  Thomas,  a  Disney  biographer. "A  brilliant 
financier  and  businessman,  Roy  helped  turn  Walt  Disney's  dreams 
into  reality,  building  the  company  that  bears  his  brother's  name."  It 
was  Roy  who  founded  the  Buena  Vista  Distribution  Company  that 
made Disney films a central part of American childhood. It was Roy 
who  created  the  merchandising  business  that  transformed  Disney 
characters  into  household  names.  And,  like  almost  every  HOW-
type, Roy  never wanted  to  be the front man, he preferred to stay  in 
the background and focus on HOW to build his brother's vision. 
Most people in the world are HOW-types. Most people are quite 
functional in the real  world and can do their jobs and do very well. 
Some may be very successful and even make millions of dollars, but 
they  will  never  build  billion-dollar  businesses  or change  the  world. 
HOW-types  don't  need  WHY-types  to  do  well.  But  WHY-guys,  for 
all their vision and imagination, often get the short end of the stick. 
Without  someone  inspired  by  their  vision  and  the  knowledge  to 
make  it  a  reality,  most  WHY-types  end  up  as  starving  visionaries, 
people   with   all   the   answers   but   never   accomplishing   much 
themselves. 
Although  so  many  of  them  fancy  themselves  visionaries,  in  real-
ity  most  successful  entrepreneurs  are  HOW-types.  Ask  an  entre-
preneur  what  they  love  about  being  an  entrepreneur and  most  will 
tell  you  they  love  to  build  things.  That  they  talk about  building  is  a 
sure  clue  that  they  know  HOW  to  get  things  done.  A business  is  a 
structure—systems and processes that need to be assembled. It is the 
HOW-types  who  are  more  adept  at  building  those  processes  and 
systems.  But  most  companies,  no  matter  how  well  built,  do  not 
become  billion-dollar  businesses  or  change  the  course  of  industries. 
To  reach  the  billion-dollar  status,  to  alter  the  course  of  an  industry, 
requires  a  very  special  and  rare  partnership  between  one  who 
knows WHY and those who know HOW. 

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
157 
In nearly every case of a person or an organization that has gone 
on  to  inspire  people  and  do  great  things,  there  exists  this  special 
partnership  between  WHY  and  HOW.  Bill  Gates,  for  example,  may 
have  been  the  visionary  who  imagined  a  world  with  a  PC  on  every 
desk,  but  Paul  Allen  built  the  company.  Herb  Kelleher  was  able  to 
personify  and  preach  the  cause  of  freedom,  but  it  was  Rollin  King 
who came up with the idea for Southwest Airlines. Steve Jobs is the 
rebel's  evangelist,  but  Steve  Wozniak  is  the  engineer  who  made  the 
Apple  work.  Jobs  had  the  vision,  Woz  had  the  goods.  It  is  the 
partnership of a vision of the future and the talent to get it done that 
makes an organization great. 
This  relationship  starts  to  clarify  the  difference between  a  vision 
statement  and  a  mission  statement  in  an  organization.  The  vision  is 
the  public  statement  of  the  founder's  intent,  WHY  the  company 
exists. It is literally the vision of a future that does not yet exist. The 
mission   statement   is   a   description   of   the   route,   the   guiding 
principles—HOW  the  company  intends  to  create  that  future.  When 
both of those things are stated clearly, the WHY-type and the HOW-
type  are  both  certain  about  their  roles  in  the  partnership.  Both  are 
working together with clarity of purpose and a plan to get there. For 
it  to  work,  however,  it  requires  more  than  a  set  of  skills,  it  requires 
trust. 
As  discussed  at  length  in  part  3,  trusting  relationships  are  in-
valuable  for  us  to  feel  safe.  Our  ability  to  trust people  or  organiza-
tions  allows  us  to  take  risks  and  feel  supported  in  our  efforts.  And 
perhaps  the  most  trusting  relationship  that  exists is  between  the 
visionary  and  the  builder,  the  WHY-guy  and  the  HOW-guy.  In  or-
ganizations  able  to  inspire,  the  best  chief  executives  are  WHY- 
types—people  who wake  up every day to  lead a cause and not just 
run  a  company.  In  these  organizations,  the  best  chief  financial  of-
ficers and chief operating officers are high-performing HOW-types, 
those  with  the  strength  of  ego  to  admit  they  are  not  visionaries 

START WITH WHY 
158 
themselves but are inspired by the leader's vision and know how to 
build  the  structure  that  can  bring  it  to  life.  The best  HOW-types 
generally  do  not  want  to  be  out  front  preaching  the  vision;  they 
prefer to work behind the scenes to build the systems that can make 
the vision a reality. It takes the combined skill and effort of both for 
great things to happen. 
It's not an accident that these unions of WHY and HOW so often 
come from families or old friendships. A shared upbringing and life 
experience  increases  the  probability  of  a  shared  set  of  values  and 
beliefs.  In  the  case  of  family  or  childhood  friends,  upbringing  and 
common  experiences  are  nearly  exactly  the  same.  That's  not  to  say 
you can't find a good partner somewhere else. It's just that growing 
up  with  somebody  and  having  a  common  life  experience  increases 
the likelihood of a shared common worldview. 
Walt  Disney  and  Roy  Disney  were  brothers.  Bill  Gates  and  Paul 
Allen  went  to  high  school  together  in  Seattle.  Herb  Kelleher  was 
Rollin King's divorce attorney and old friend. Martin Luther King Jr. 
and  Ralph  Abernathy  both  preached  in  Birmingham,  long  before 
the  civil  rights  movement  took  form.  And  Steve  Jobs  and  Steve 
Wozniak were best friends in high school. The list goes on. 
To Run or To Lead 
For all the talented HOW-types running today's organizations, they 
can achieve success that will last their lifetimes, but they will spend 
their lifetimes running their companies. There are many  ways  to be 
successful  and  drive  profits.  Any  number  of  manipulations,  only 
some  of  which  I've  touched  upon  in  this  book,  work quite  well. 
Even the ability to create a tipping point is possible without creating 
lasting  change.  It's  called  a  fad.  But  great  organizations  function 
exactly like any social  movement. They inspire  people to talk about 
a  product  or  idea,  include  that  product  in  the  context  of  their 
lifestyle, share the idea or even find ways to advance the prosperity 

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
159 
of  the  organization  itself.  Great  organizations  not  only  excite  the 
human spirit, they inspire people to take part in helping to advance 
the  cause  without  needing  to  pay  them  or  incentivize  them  in  any 
particular way. No cash-back incentives or mail-in rebates required. 
People feel compelled to spread the word, not because they have to, 
but  because  they  want  to.  They  willingly  take  up  arms  to  share  the 
message that inspires them. 
Build a Megaphone That Works 
After a three-month selection process, BCI finally chose a new ad 
agency  to  help  develop  a  campaign  to  launch  their  new  product 
line. Big Company Incorporated is a well-known brand operating in 
a  fairly  cluttered  market  space.  As  a  manufacturer,  their  products 
are sold via a third-party sales force, often on the shelves of big-box 
retailers, so they don't have direct control over the sales process. The 
best they can do is to try to influence the sale from a distance— with 
marketing.  BCI  is  a  good  company  with  a  strong  culture.  The 
employees  respect  the  management,  and  in  general  the  company 
does  good  work.  But  over  the  years  the  competition has  grown 
fairly  stiff.  And  although  BCI  has  a  good  product  and  competitive 
pricing,  it  is  still  tough  to  maintain  strong  growth  year  over  year. 
This   year,  BCI  management  is  particularly  excited  because  the 
company  is  launching  a  new  product  they  really  think  will  make 
BCI  stand  out.  To  help  promote  it,  BCI's  agency  has  launched  a 
major new ad campaign. 
"From  the  leading  maker,"  says  the  new  ad,  "comes  the  newest, 
most  innovative  product  you've  ever  seen."  The  ad  goes  on  to  talk 
about  all  the  new  features  and  benefits,  and  includes  something 
about  the  "quality  you've  come  to  expect  from  BCI,"  something  the 
BCI  executives  felt  quite  strongly  about  including.  BCI  executives 
have  worked  hard  to  build  their  company's  reputation  and  they 
want to leverage it. They are very excited about their new campaign 

START WITH WHY 
160 
and  are  really  banking  on  the  success  of  this  product  to  help  drive 
sales  in  general.  They  know  they  do  good  work,  and they  want  to 
get the message out. They need it to be loud. And with a budget of 
millions  of  dollars  to  advertise  their  new  product,  in  that  respect, 
BCI succeeds. 
But there is a problem. 
BCI and their agency did a good job of telling people about their 
new  product.  The  work  was  quite  creative.  They  were  able  to 
explain what was new and special about their latest innovation, and 
focus  groups  agreed  that  the  new  product  was  much  better  than 
that  of  the  competition.  The  millions  of  dollars  in  media  ensured 
that lots of people would see their advertising and see it often. Their 
reach   and   frequency,   the   measurement   commonly   used by   ad 
agencies to gauge the number of people exposed to the advertising, 
was very good. There is no doubt that their message was loud. The 
problem  was,  it  wasn't  clear.  It  was  all  WHATs  and HOW  and  no 
WHY.  Even  though  people  learned  what  the  product  did,  no  one 
knew what BCI believed. The good news is, it's not a complete loss; 
the  products  will  sell  as  long  as  the  ads  are  on  the  air  and  the 
promotions  remain  competitive.  It's  an  effective  strategy,  but  an 
expensive way to make money. 
What  if  Martin  Luther  King  had  delivered  a  comprehensive 
twelve-point  plan  about  achieving  civil  rights  in  America,  a  plan 
more  comprehensive  than  any  other  plan  for  civil  rights  ever  of-
fered? Booming through the speakers that summer's day in 1963, his 
message  would  have  been  loud.  Microphones,  like  advertising  and 
PR,  are  fantastic  for  making  sure  a  message  is  heard.  Like  BCI, 
King's  message  would  still  have  reached  thousands  of  people.  But 
his belief would not have been clear. 
Volume  is  reasonably  easy  to  achieve.  All  it  takes is  money  or 
stunts.  Money  can  pay  to  keep  a  message  front  and  center.  And 
publicity  stunts  are  good  at  getting  on  the  news.  But  neither  plants 

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
161 
seeds of loyalty. Many reading this may remember that Oprah Win-
frey once gave away a free car to every member of her studio audi-
ence. It happened several years ago, in 2004, and still people refer to 
the stunt. But how many can recall the model of car she gave away? 
That's the problem. It was  Pontiac that donated $7 million worth of 
cars, 276 of their new G6 model, to be exact. And it was Pontiac that 
saw  the  stunt  as  a  way  to  market  their  new  car.  Yet  although  the 
stunt  worked well to reinforce Oprah's generous  nature, something 
with  which  we  are  all  familiar,  few  remember  that  Pontiac  was  a 
part  of  the  event.  Worse,  the  stunt  didn't  do  anything  to  reinforce 
some  purpose,  cause  or  belief  that  Pontiac  represents.  We  had  no 
idea  what  Pontiac's  WHY  was  before  the  stunt,  so  it’s  hard  for  the 
publicity  stunt  to  do  much  more  than,  well,  be  a  stunt  to  get  some 
publicity. With no sense of WHY, there is nothing else it's doing. 
For  a  message  to  have  real  impact,  to  affect  behavior  and  seed 
loyalty,  it  needs  more  than  publicity.  It  needs  to publicize  some 
higher  purpose,  cause  or  belief  to  which  those  with  similar  values 
and beliefs can relate.  Only then can the message create any lasting 
mass-market  success.  For  a  stunt  to  appeal  to  the  left  side  of  the 
curve  of  the  Law  of  Diffusion,  WHY  the  stunt  is  being  performed, 
beyond  the  desire  to  generate  press,  must  be  clear.  Though  there 
may  be  short-term  benefits  without  clarity,  loud  is  nothing  more 
than  excessive  volume.  Or  in  business  vernacular:  clutter.  And 
companies  wonder  why  differentiation  is  such  a  challenge  these 
days. Have you heard the volume coming from some of them?1 
In  contrast,  what  would  have  been  the  impact  of  Dr.  King’s 
speech  had  he  not  had  a  microphone  and  loudspeakers?  His  vision 
would  have  been  no  less  clear.  His  words  would  have  been  no  less 
inspiring. He knew what he believed and he spoke with passion and 
charisma  about  that  belief.  But  only  the  few  people  with  front-row 
seats  would  have  been  inspired  by  those  words.  A  leader  with  a 
cause,  whether  it  be  an  individual  or  an  organization,  must  have  a 

START WITH WHY 
162 
megaphone  through  which  to  deliver  his  message.  And  it  must  be 
clear  and  loud  to  work.  Clarity  of  purpose,  cause  or  belief  is 
important,  but  it  is  equally  important  that  people hear  you.  For  a 
WHY to have the power to move people it must not only be clear, it 
must be amplified to reach enough people to tip the scale. 
It's  no  coincidence  that  the  three-dimensional  Golden  Circle  is  a 
cone.  It  is,  in  practice,  a  megaphone.  An  organization  effectively 
becomes  the  vessel  through  which  a  person  with  a  clear  purpose, 
cause or belief can speak to the outside world. But for a megaphone 
to work, clarity must come first. Without a clear message, what will 
you amplify? 
Say It Only If You Believe It 
Dr.  King  used  his  megaphone  to  rally  throngs  of  people  to  follow 
him  in  pursuit  of  social  justice.  The  Wright  brothers  used  their 
megaphone  to  rally  their  local  community  to  help  them  build  the 
technology that could change the world. Thousands of people heard 
John  F.  Kennedy's  belief  in  service  and  rallied  to put  a  man  on  the 
moon in less than a decade. The ability to excite and inspire people 
to  go  out  of  their  way  to  contribute  to  something  bigger  than 
themselves  is  not  unique  to  social  causes.  Any  organization  is 
capable of building a megaphone that can achieve a huge impact. In 
fact,  it  is  one  of  the  defining  factors  that  makes an  organization 
great. Great organizations  don't just drive profits, they lead people, 
and they change the course of industries and sometimes our lives in 
the process. 
A clear sense of WHY sets expectations. When we don't know an 
organization's  WHY,  we  don't  know  what  to  expect,  so  we  expect 
the   minimum—price,   quality,   service,   features—the   commodity 
stuff.  But  when  we  do  have  a  sense  for  the  WHY,  we expect  more. 
For those not comfortable being held to a higher standard, I strongly 
advise  against  trying  to  learn  your  WHY  or  keeping your  Golden 

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
163 
Circle in balance. Higher standards are hard to maintain. It requires 
the  discipline  to  constantly  talk  about  and  remind everyone  WHY 
the organization exists in the first place. It requires that everyone in 
the  organization  be  held  accountable  to  HOW  you  do things—to 
your  values  and  guiding  principles.  And  it  takes  time  and  effort  to 
ensure  that  everything  you  say  and  do  is  consistent  with  your 
WHY. But for those willing to put in the effort, there are some great 
advantages. 
Richard  Branson  first  built  Virgin  Records  into  a  multibillion- 
dollar retail music brand. Then he started a successful record label. 
Later  he  started  an  airline  that  is  today  considered  one  of  the  pre-
mier  airlines  in  the  world.  He  then  started  a  soda brand,  wedding- 
planning  company,  insurance  company  and  mobile  phone  service. 
And  the  list  goes  on.  Likewise,  Apple  sells  us  computers,  mobile 
phones,  DVRs  and  mp3  players,  and  has  replicated  their  capacity 
for  innovation  again  and  again.  The  ability  of  some  companies  not 
to  just  succeed  but  to  repeat  their  success  is  due to  the  loyal 
followings they command,  the throngs of people  who root for  their 
success.  In  the  business  world,  they  say  Apple  is  a  lifestyle  brand. 
They  underestimate  Apple's  power.  Gucci  is  a  lifestyle  brand—
Apple changes the course of industries. By any definition these few 
companies don't function like corporate entities. They exist as social 
movements. 
Repeating Greatness 
Ron  Bruder  is  not  a  household  name,  but  he  is  a  great  leader.  In 
1985, he stood at a crosswalk with his two daughters waiting for the 
light to change so they could cross the street. A perfect opportunity, 
he  thought,  to  teach  the  young  girls  a  valuable  life  lesson.  He 
pointed across the street to the red glow of the "Do Not Walk" signal 
and  asked  them  what  they  thought  that  sign  meant.  "It  means  we 

START WITH WHY 
164 
have   to   stand   here,"   they   replied.   "Are   you   sure?" he   asked 
rhetorically. "How do you know it's not telling us to run?" 
Soft-spoken  and  almost  always  wearing  a  well-tailored  three-  piece 
suit when he comes to work, Bruder looks like you would imagine a 
conservative executive to look like. But don't assume you know how 
things work simply based on what you see. Bruder is anything but a 
stereotype. Though he has enjoyed the trappings of success, he is not 
motivated  by  them.  They  have  always  been  the  unintended  by-
product  of  his  work.  Bruder  is  driven  by  a  clear  sense  of  WHY.  He 
sees  a  world  in  which  people  accept  the  lives  they live  and  do  the 
things  they  do  not  because  they  have  to,  but  because  no  one  ever 
showed  them  an  alternative.  This  is  the  lesson  he  was  teaching  his 
daughters   that   day   at   the   crosswalk—there   is   always   another 
perspective  to  be  considered.  That  Bruder  always  starts  with  WHY 
has  enabled  him  to  achieve  great  things  for  himself.  But  more 
significantly, it is his ability to share his WHY through the things he 
does   that   inspires   those   around   him   to   do   great   things   for 
themselves. 
Like most of us, the career path Bruder has followed is incidental. 
But WHY he does things has never changed. Everything Bruder has 
ever done starts with his  WHY, his unyielding belief that if you can 
simply  show  someone  that  an  alternative  route  is  possible,  it  can 
open  the  possibility  that  such  a  route  can  be  followed.  Though  the 
work he is doing today is world-altering, Bruder hasn't always been 
in  the  world  peace  business.  Like  many  inspiring  leaders,  he  has 
changed  the  course  of  an  industry.  But  Ron  Bruder  is  no  one-hit 
wonder.  He  has  been  able  to  repeat  his  success  and change  the 
course of multiple industries, multiple times. 
A  senior  executive  at  a  large  food  conglomerate  that  sold  vege-
tables,  canned  goods  and  meats  decided  to  buy  a  travel  agency  for 
his  nephew.  He  asked  Bruder,  as  the  chief  financial  officer  of  the 
company  at  the  time,  to  take  a  look  at  the  financials  of  the  agency 

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
165 
before  he  went  through  with  the  purchase.  Seeing  an  opportunity 
others didn't, Bruder decided to join the small travel  agency to  help 
lead it. Once there, he saw how all the other travel agencies worked 
and  took  an  alternative  course.  Greenwell  became  the  first  travel 
agency  on  the  eastern  seaboard  to  take  advantage  of  new  technolo-
gies  and  fully  computerize  their  operations.  Not  only  did  they  be-
come  one  of  the  most  successful  companies  in  the  region,  but  after 
only  a  year,  their  business  model  became  a  standard  for  the  whole 
industry. Then Bruder did it again. 
A former client of Bruder's, Sam Rosengarten, was in some dirty 
businesses—coal,  oil  and  gas;  all  industries  that  created  brown- 
fields,  land  that  had  been  contaminated  by  their  operations.  Little 
could be done with brownfields. They were too polluted to develop, 
and  the  liability  to  clean  them  up  was  so  high  that  the  insurance 
premiums  alone  made  it  too  prohibitive  to  even  try.  But  Bruder 
doesn't see challenges the same way as everyone else. Most avoided 
brownfields  because  they  could  only  see  the  cost  to  clean  them  up. 
Bruder   focused   instead   on   the   actual   cleaning.   His alternative 
perspective revealed the perfect solution. 
Bruder    had    already    formed    his    real    estate    development 
company,  Brookhill,  and  with  eighteen  employees,  he  was  doing 
quite well. Knowing what he needed to do to seize the opportunity, 
he  approached  Dames  &  Moore,  one  of  the  largest  environmental 
engineering    companies    in    the    world,    and    shared    his new 
perspective   with   them.   They   loved   his   idea   and   formed   a 
partnership  to  pursue  it.  With  an  engineering  company  with  18,000 
people  on  board,  the  perceived  risk  was  greatly  minimized  and  the 
insurance companies were happy to offer affordable insurance. With 
affordable  insurance  in  place,  Credit  Suisse  First Boston  offered 
financing   that   gave   Brookhill   the   ability   to   buy,   remediate, 
redevelop    and    sell    almost    $200    million    worth    of    former 
environmentally   contaminated   properties.   Brookhill,   so   called 

START WITH WHY 
166 
because Bruder comes from Brooklyn and, as he puts it, "it's a long, 
uphill   climb   to   get   out   of   Brooklyn,"   was   the   pioneer   of   the 
brownfield redevelopment industry. An industry that thrives to this 
day.  Bruder's  WHY  not  only  steered  a  path  that  was good  for 
business, but in the process also helped clean up the environment. 
It doesn't matter WHAT Ron Bruder does. The industries and the 
challenges  are  incidental.  What  never  changes  is  WHY  he  does 
things.  Bruder  knows  that,  no  matter  how  good  an  opportunity 
looks  on  paper,  no  matter  how  smart  he  is  and  no  matter  his  track 
record,  he  would  never  be  able  to  achieve  anything unless  there 
were  others  to  help  him.  He  knows  that  success  is  a  team  sport  He 
has  a  remarkable  ability  to  attract  those  who  believe  what  he 
believes. Talented people are drawn to him with one request: "How 
can I help?" Having defied accepted perspectives and revolutionized 
more  than  one  industry,  Bruder  has  now  set  his  sights  on  a  bigger 
challenge: world peace. He founded the Education for Employment 
Foundation, the megaphone that would help him do it. 
The  EFE  Foundation  is  making  significant  headway  in  helping 
young men and women in  the Middle East to significantly alter the 
course of their lives and indeed the course of the region. Just has he 
taught  his  daughters  at  the  crosswalk  that  there  is  always  an  alter-
native route, he brings an alternative perspective to the problems in 
Middle East. Like of all Bruder's past successes, the EFE Foundation 
will  drive  businesses  and  do  tremendous  amounts  of good  in  the 
process. Bruder doesn't run companies, he leads movements. 
All Movements Are Personal 
It  started  on  September  11,2001.  Like  so  many  of  us,  Bruder  turned 
his  attention  to  the  Middle  East  after  the  attacks to  ask  why  some-
thing  like  that  could  happen.  He  understood  that  if  such  an  event 
could  happen  once,  it  could  happen  again,  and  for  the  lives  of  his 
own daughters he wanted to find a way to prevent that. 

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
167 
In the course of trying to figure out what he could do, he made a 
remarkable  discovery  that  went  much  deeper  than  protecting  his 
daughters  or  even  the  prevention  of  terrorism  in  the  United  States. 
In America, he realized, the vast majority of young people wake up 
in  the  morning  with  a  feeling  that  there  is  opportunity  for  them  in 
the  future.  Regardless  of  the  economy,  most  young  boys  and  girls 
who  grow  up  in  the  United  States  have  an  inherent  sense  of  opti-
mism  that  they  can  achieve  something  if  they  want  to—to  live  the 
American Dream. A young boy growing up in Gaza or a young girl 
living in Yemen does not wake up every day with the same feeling. 
Even if they have the desire, the same optimism is not there. It is too 
easy  to  point  and  say  that  the  culture  is  different.  That  is  not 
actionable.  The  real  reason  is  that  there  is  a  distinct  lack  of  institu-
tions  to  give  young  people  in  the  region  a  sense  of  optimism  for 
their  future.  A  college  education  in  Jordan,  for  example,  may  offer 
some  social  status,  but  it  doesn't  necessarily  prepare  a  young  adult 
for  what  lies  ahead.  The  education  system,  in  cases  like  this,  per-
petuates a systemic cultural pessimism. 
Bruder realized the problems we face with terrorism in the West 
have  less  to  do  with  what  young  boys  and  girls  in  the  Middle  East 
think  about  America  and  more  to  do  with  what  they  think  about 
themselves  and  their  own  vision  of  the  future.  Through  the  EFE 
Foundation, Bruder is setting up programs across the Middle East to 
teach  young  adults  the  hard  and  soft  skills  that  will  help  them  feel 
like they have opportunity in life. To feel like they can be in control 
of their  own destinies. Bruder is using the EFE Foundation to share 
his  WHY  on  a  global  scale—to  teach  people  that  there  is  always  an 
alternative to the path they think they are on. 
The  Education  for  Employment  Foundation  is  not  an  American 
charity hoping to do good in faraway lands. It is a global movement. 
Each  EFE  operation  runs  independently,  with  locals making  up  the 
majority  of  their  local  boards.  Local  leaders  take personal  responsi-

START WITH WHY 
168 
bility to give young men and women that feeling of opportunity by 
giving   them   the   skills,   knowledge   and,   most   importantly,   the 
confidence  to  choose  an  alternative  path  for  themselves.  Mayyada 
Abu-Jaber  is  leading  the  movement  in  Jordan.  Mohammad  Naja  is 
spreading the cause in Gaza and the West Bank. And Maeen Alery- 
ani is proving that a cause can even change a culture in Yemen. 
In Yemen, children can expect to receive nine years of education; 
This  is  one  of  the  lowest  rates  in  the  world.  In  the  United  States, 
children can expect sixteen years. Inspired by Bruder, Aleryani sees 
such an amazing opportunity for young men and women to change 
their perspective and take greater control of their own future. He set 
out   to   find   capital   to   jump-start   his   EFE   operation   in   Sana'a, 
Yemen's  capital,  and  in  one  week  was  able  to  raise $50,000.  The 
speed  at  which  he  raised  that  amount  is  pretty  good  even  by  our 
philanthropic  standards.  But  this  is  Yemen,  and  Yemen  has  no 
culture  of  philanthropy,  making  his  achievement  that  much  more 
remarkable.  Yemen  is  also  one  of  the  poorest  nations  in  the  region. 
But  when  you  tell  people  WHY  you're  doing  what  you're  doing, 
remarkable things happen. 
Across  the  region,  everyone  involved  in  EFE  believes  that  they 
can help teach their brothers and sisters and sons and daughters the 
skills  that  will  help  them  change  path  that  they think  they  are  on. 
They  are  working  to  help  the  youth  across  the  region  believe  that 
their future is bright and full of opportunity. And they don't do it for 
Bruder, they do it for themselves. That's the reason EFE will change 
the world. 
Sitting  at  the  top  of  the  megaphone,  at  the  point  of  WHY, 
Bruder's role is to inspire, to start the movement. But it is those who 
believe  who  will  effect  the  real  change  and  keep  the  movement 
going.  Anyone,  regardless  where  they  live,  what  they  do  or  their 
nationality,  can  participate  in  this  movement.  It's  about  feeling  like 
we belong. If you believe that there is an alternative path to the one 

STATUS BUT WHY, BUT KNOW HOW 
169 
we're on, and all we have to do is point to it, then visit the Web site 
efefoundation.org  and  join  the  movement.  To  change the  world 
takes the support of all those who believe. 
 
 

 
170 

 
171 
9 
 
KNOW WHY. KNOW HOW, 
THEN WHAT? 
They marched in, single file. Not a word was spoken. No one made 
any  eye  contact  with  anyone  else.  They  all  looked  the  same.  Their 
heads shaved, their clothes gray and tattered. Their boots dusty. One 
by one, they filled a large, cavernous room, like a hangar from a sci-
ence  fiction  movie.  The  only  color  was  gray.  The  walls  were  gray 
Dust and smoke filled the space making even the air look gray. 
Hundreds,  maybe  even  thousands  of  these  drone-people  sat  on 
neatly  organized  benches.  Row  after  row  after  row. A  sea  of  gray 
conformity. They all watched a projection of a huge talking head on 
the  screen  in  the  front  of  the  room  that  filled  the  entire  wall.  This 
apparent  leader  recited  dogma  and  propaganda,  stating  proudly 
that  they  were  in  complete  control.  They  had  achieved  perfection, 
They were free of pests. Or so they thought. 

START WITH WHY 
172 
Running  down  one  of  the  tunnels  that  led  into  the  cavernous 
hangar,  a  lone  blonde  woman.  She  wore  bright  red  shorts  and  a 
crisp  white  T-shirt.  Like  a  lighthouse,  her  complexion  and  the  color 
of hei clothes seemed to shine through gray air. Pursued by security, 
she rail with a sledgehammer. This would not end well for the status 
quo. 
On  January  22,  1984,  Apple  launched  their  Macintosh  computer 
with  their  now-famous  commercial  depicting  an  Orwellian  scene  of 
a   totalitarian   regime   holding   control   over   a   population   and 
promised  that  "1984  won't  be  like  1984"  But  this  advertising  was 
much  more  than  just  advertising.  It  was  not  about  the  features  and 
benefits  of  a  new  product.  It  was  not  about  a  "differentiating  value 
proposition."  It  was,  for  all  intents  and  purposes,  a  manifesto.  A 
poetic ode to Apple's WHY, it was the film version of an individual 
rebelling  against  the  status  quo,  igniting  a  revolution.  And  though 
their   products   have   changed   and   fashions   have   changed,   this 
commercial  is  as  relevant  today  as  it  was  twenty-five  years  ago 
when  it  first  aired.  And  that's  because  a  WHY  never  changes. 
WHAT you do can change with the times, but WHY you do it never 
does. 
The commercial is one of the many things the company has done 
or  said  over  the  years  to  show  or  tell  the  outside world  what  they 
believe.    All    Apple's    advertising    and    communications,    their 
products,  partnerships,  their  packaging,  their  store  design,  they  are 
all  WHATs  to  Apple's  WHY,  proof  that  they  actively challenge  sta-
tus  quo  thinking  to  empower  the  individual.  Ever  notice  that  their 
advertising  never  shows  groups  enjoying  their  products?  Always 
individuals.  Their  Think  Different  campaign  depicted  individuals 
who  thought  differently,  never  groups.  Always  individuals.  And 
when Apple tells us to "Think Different," they are not just describing 
themselves.  The  ads  showed  pictures  of  Pablo  Picasso,  Martha 
Graham, Jim Henson, Alfred Hitchcock, to name a few, with the line 

KNOW WHY, KNOW HOW, THEN WHAT? 
173 
"Think  Different"  on  the  upper  right  hand  side  of  the  page.  Apple 
does not embody the rebel spirit because they associated themselves 
with  known  rebels.  They  chose  known  rebels  because they  embody 
the same rebel spirit. The WHY came before the creative solution in 
the advertising. Not a single ad showed a group. This is no accident. 
Empowering  the  individual  spirit  is  WHY  Apple  exists.  Apple 
knows their WHY and so do we. Agree with them or not, we know 
what they believe because they tell us. 
Speak Clearly and Ye Shall Be Clearly Understood 
An organization is represented by the cone in the three-dimensional 
view  of  The  Golden  Circle.  This  organized  system  sits  atop  another 
system: the marketplace. The marketplace is made up of all the cus-
tomers  and  potential  customers,  all  the  press,  the shareholders,  all 
the   competition,   suppliers   and   all   the   money.   This system   is 

START WITH WHY 
174 
inherently   chaotic   and   disorganized.   The   only   contact   that   the 
organized system  has with the disorganized system  is at the base—
at  the  WHAT  level.  Everything  an  organization  says and  does 
communicates  the  leader's  vision  to  the  outside  world.  All  the 
products and services that  the company sells, all the  marketing and 
advertising,  all  the  contact  with  the  world  outside  communicate 
this.  If  people  don't  buy  WHAT  you  do,  they  buy  WHY  you  do  it, 
and  if  all  the  things  happening  at  the  WHAT  level  do  not  clearly 
represent  WHY  the  company  exists,  then  the  ability to  inspire  is 
severely complicated. 
When  a  company  is  small,  this  is  not  an  issue  because  the 
founder has plenty of direct contact with the outside world. Trusted 
HOW-types may be in short supply and the founder opts to make a 
majority  of  the  big  decisions.  The  founder  or  leader  actually  goes 
out and talks to customers, sells the product and hires most if not all 
the  employees.  As  the  company  grows,  however,  systems  and 
processes are added and other people will join. The cause embodied 
by  an  individual  slowly  morphs  into  a  structured  organization  and 
the  cone  starts  to  take  shape.  As  it  grows,  the  leader's  role  changes. 
He  will  no  longer  be  the  loudest  part  of  the  megaphone;  he  will 
become  the  source  of  the  message  that  is  to  flow  through  the 
megaphone. 
When  a  company  is  small,  it  revolves  around  the  personality  of 
the founder. There is  no debate that the founder's personality is the 
personality  of  the  company.  Why  then  do  we  think  things  change 
just because a company is successful? What's the difference between 
Steve  Jobs  the  man  and  Apple  the  company?  Nothing. What's  the 
difference  between  Sir  Richard  Branson's  personality  and  Virgin's 
personality? Nothing. As a company grows, the CEO's job is to per-
sonify the WHY. To ooze of it. To talk about it. To preach it. To be a 
symbol  of  what  the  company  believes.  They  are  the  intention  and 
WHAT  the  company  says  and  does  is  their  voice.  Like  Martin  Lu-

KNOW WHY, KNOW HOW, THEN WHAT? 
175 
ther  King  and  his  social  movement,  the  leader's  job  is  no  longer  to 
close all the deals; it is to inspire. 
As  the  organization  grows,  the  leader  becomes  physically  re-
moved,  farther  and  farther  away  from  WHAT  the  company  does, 
and even farther away from the outside market. I love asking CEOs 
what  their biggest priority  is, and, depending  on their size  or struc-
ture, I generally get one of  two answers: customers or shareholders. 
Sadly,  there  aren't  many  CEOs  of  companies  of  any  reasonable  size 
who  have  daily  contact  with  customers  anymore.  And customers 
and  shareholders  alike  both  exist  outside  the  organization  in  the 
chaotic world of the marketplace. Just as the cone demonstrates, the 
CEO's  job,  the  leader's  responsibility,  is  not  to  focus  on  the  outside 
market—it's to focus on the layer directly beneath: HOW. The leader 
must  ensure  that  there  are  people  on  the  team  who  believe  what 
they  believe  and  know  HOW  to  build  it.  The  HOW-  types  are 
responsible  for  understanding  WHY  and  must  come  to work  every 
day  to  develop  the  systems  and  hire  the  people  who are  ultimately 
responsible for bringing the WHY to life. The general employees are 
responsible  for  demonstrating  the  WHY  to  the  outside  world  in 
whatever the company says and does. The challenge is that they are 
able to do it clearly. 
Remember  the  biology  of  The  Golden  Circle.  The  WHY exists  in 
the  part  of  the  brain  that  controls  feelings  and  decision-making  but 
not  language.  WHATs  exist  in  the  part  of  the  brain that  controls 
rational  thought  and  language.  Comparing  the  biology  of  the  brain 
to  the  three-dimensional  rendering  of  The  Golden  Circle  reveals  a 
profound insight. 

START WITH WHY 
176 
 
The leader sitting at the top of the organization is the inspiration, 
the  symbol  of  the  reason  we  do  what  we  do.  They  represent  the 
emotional   limbic   brain.   WHAT   the   company   says   and   does 
represents  the  rational  thought  and  language  of  the  neocortex.  Just 
as it is hard for people to speak their feelings, like someone trying to 
explain   why   they   love   their   spouse,   it   is   equally   hard   for   an 
organization  to  explain  its  WHY.  The  part  of  the  brain  that  controls 
feelings and the part that controls language are not the same. Given 
that the cone is simply a three-dimensional rendering of The Golden 
Circle,  which  is  firmly  grounded  in  the  biology  of human  decision-
making, the logic follows that organizations of any size will struggle 
to  clearly  communicate  their  WHY.  Translated  into  business  terms 
this  means  that  trying  to  communicate  your  differentiating  value 
proposition is really hard. 
Put  bluntly,  the  struggle  that  so  many  companies  have  to  dif-
ferentiate  or  communicate  their  true  value  to  the  outside  world  is 
not  a  business  problem,  it's  a  biology  problem.  And  just  like  a  per-
 

KNOW WHY, KNOW HOW, THEN WHAT? 
177 
son  struggling  to  put  her  emotions  into  words,  we  rely  on  meta-
phors, imagery and analogies in an attempt to communicate how we 
feel.  Absent  the  proper  language  to  share  our  deep emotions,  our 
purpose,  cause  or  belief,  we  tell  stories.  We  use  symbols.  We  create 
tangible  things  for  those  who  believe  what  we  believe  to  point  to 
and  say,  "That's  why  I'm  inspired."  If  done  properly,  that's  what 
marketing,  branding  and  products  and  services  become;  a  way  for 
organizations  to  communicate  to  the  outside  world. Communicate 
clearly and you shall be understood. 
 

 
178 
 
 

 
179 
10 
 
COMMUNICATION IS NOT ABOUT 
SPEAKING, IT'S ABOUT LISTENING 
Martin  Luther  King  Jr.,  a  man  who  would  become  a  symbol  of  the 
entire  civil  rights  movement,  chose  to  deliver  his famous  "I  Have  0 
Dream"  speech  in  front  of  another  symbol:  the  Lincoln  Memorial, 
Like  King,  Lincoln  stands  (or  in  the  case  of  the  memorial,  sits)  as  a 
symbol  of  the  American  value  of  freedom  for  all.  Great  societies 
understand  the  importance  of  symbols  as  a  way  of  reinforcing  their 
values,  of  capturing  their  beliefs.  Dictators  understand  the  impor-
tance  of  symbols  all  too  well.  But  in  their  case,  the  symbols  are 
usually of them and not of a larger belief. Symbols help us make tan-
gible  that  which  is  intangible.  And  the  only  reason  symbols  have 
meaning  is  because  we  infuse  them  with  meaning.  That  meaning 
lives  in  our  minds,  not  in  the  item  itself.  Only  when  the  purpose, 
cause or belief is clear can a symbol command great power. 
The  flag,  for  example,  is  nothing  more  than  a  symbol  of  out 
nation's values and beliefs. And we follow the flag into battle. That's 
some serious power. Ever notice the patch of the American flag on a 
soldier's  right  arm?  It's  backward.  There  was  no  mistake  made,  it's 
like that on purpose. A flag flying on a staff, as an army was rushing 
into battle, would appear backward if viewed from the right side, To 

START WITH WHY 
180 
put it the other way around on the right shoulder would appeal as if 
the soldier were in retreat. 
Our  flag  is  infused  with  so  much  meaning  that  some have  tried 
to  pass  laws  banning  its  desecration.  It's  not  the material  out  of 
which  the  flag  is  sewn  that  these  patriots  aim  to  protect.  The  laws 
they  propose  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  destruction  of  property. 
Their  goal  is  to  protect  the  meaning  the  symbol  represents:  the 
WHY.  The  laws  they  drafted  tried  to  protect  the  intangible  set  of 
values  and  beliefs  by  protecting  the  symbol  of  those  values  and 
beliefs.  Though  the  laws  have  been  struck  down  by  the  Supreme 
Court,  they  have  spurred  contentious  and  emotionally  charged  de-
bates. They pit our desire for freedom of expression with our desire 
to protect a symbol of that freedom. 
Ronald  Reagan,  the  Great  Communicator,  knew  all  too  well  the 
power  of  symbols.  In  1982,  he  was  the  first  president  to  invite  a 
"hero" to sit in the balcony of the House chamber during the State of 
the  Union  address,  a  tradition  that  has  continued  every  year  since. 
A   man   who   exuded   optimism,   Reagan   knew   the   value   of 
symbolizing  the  values  of  America  instead  of  just  talking  about 
them. His guest, who sat with the First Lady, was Lenny Skutnik, a 
government  employee  who  had  dived  into  the  icy  Potomac  just 
days before to save a woman who had fallen from a helicopter that 
was attempting to rescue her after an Air Florida plane crashed into 
the river. Reagan was trying to make a point, that words are hollow, 
but  deeds  and  values  are  deep.  After  he  told  Skutnik's  story  he 
waxed,  "Don't  let  anyone  tell  you  that  America's  best  days  are  be-
hind her, that the American spirit has been vanquished. We've seen 
it triumph too often in our lives to stop believing in it now." Skutnik 
became Reagan's symbol of courage. 
Most  companies  have  logos,  but  few  have  been  able  to  convert 
those  logos  into  meaningful  symbols.  Because  most  companies  are 
bad  at  communicating  what  they  believe,  so  it  follows  that  most 

COMMUNICATION IS NOT ABOUT SPEAKING, IT’S LISTENING 
181 
logos  are  devoid  of  any  meaning.  At  best  they  serve  as  icons  to 
identify  a  company  and  its  products.  A  symbol  cannot  have  any 
deep  meaning  until  we  know  WHY  it  exists  in  terms  bigger  than 
simply  to  identify  the  company.  Without  clarity  of WHY,  a  logo  is 
just a logo. 
To say that a logo stands for quality, service, innovation and the 
like only reinforces its status as just a logo. These qualities are about 
the  company  and  not  about  the  cause.  Don't  forget  the  dictators. 
They  understand  the  power  of  symbols,  except  the  symbols  are 
often  of  them.  Likewise,  so  many  companies  act  like  dictators—it's 
all about them and what they want. They tell us what to do, they tell 
us what we need, they tell us they have the answers but they do not 
inspire  us  and  they  do  not  command  our  loyalty.  And  to  take  the 
analogy  a  step  further,  the  way  dictators  maintain their  power  is 
through  fear,  reward  and  every  other  manipulation  they  can  think 
of.  People  follow  dictators  not  because  they  want  to,  but  because 
they  have  to.  For  companies  to  be  perceived  as  a  great  leaders  and 
not  dictators,  all  their  symbols,  including  their  logos,  need  to  stand 
for  something  in  which  we  can  all  believe.  Something  we  can  all 
support. That takes clarity, discipline and consistency. 
For  a  logo  to  become  a  symbol,  people  must  be  inspired  to  use 
that  logo  to  say  something  about  who  they  are.  Couture  fashion 
labels  are  the  most  obvious  example  of  this.  People  use  them  to 
demonstrate  status.  But  many  of  them  are  somewhat  generic  in 
what  they  symbolize.  There  is  a  more  profound  example:  Harley- 
Davidson. 
There  are  people  who  walk  around  with  Harley-Davidson  tat-
toos on their bodies. That's insane. They've tattooed a corporate logo 
on  their  skin.  Some  of  them  don't  even  own  the  product!  Why 
would  rational  people  tattoo  a  corporate  logo  on  their  bodies?  The 
reason  is  simple.  After  years  of  Harley  being  crystal  clear  about 
what  they  believe,  after  years  of  being  disciplined  about  a  set  of 

START WITH WHY 
182 
values  and  guiding  principles  and  after  years  of  being  doggedly 
consistent about everything they say and do, their logo  has become 
a symbol. It no longer simply identifies a company and its products; 
it identifies a belief. 
In truth, most people who tattoo Harley-Davidson logos on their 
bodies have no idea what the stock price of Harley is. They have no 
idea   about   some   management   shake-up   the   week   before.   That 
symbol  is  no  longer  about  Harley.  The  logo  embodies  an  en-  tire 
value  set—their  own.  The  symbol  is  no  longer  about Harley,  it's 
about  them.  Randy  Fowler,  a  former  U.S.  Marine  and now  general 
manager  of  a  Harley-Davidson  dealership  in  California,  proudly 
sports  a  large  Harley  tattoo  on  his  left  arm.  "It  symbolizes  who  I 
am," he says. "Mostly, it says I'm an American." Customer and com-
pany  are  now  one  and  the  same.  The  meaning  of  Harley-Davidson 
has value in people's lives because, for those who believe in Harley's 
WHY, it helps them express the meaning of their own lives. 
Because of Harley's clarity, discipline and consistency, most will 
know  what  that  symbol  means,  even  if  you  don't  subscribe  to  it 
yourself.  That's  the  reason  why  when  someone  walks into  a  bar 
with a big Harley logo on his arm we take a step back and give him 
a wide berth. The symbol has become so meaningful, in fact, that 12 
percent  of  Harley-Davidson  revenues  are  strictly  from  merchan-
dising. That's remarkable. 
It's  not  just  logos,  however,  that  can  serve  as  symbols.  Symbols 
are  any  tangible  representation  of  a  clear  set  of  values  and  beliefs. 
An ink-stained finger for Iraqis was a symbol of a new beginning. A 
London  double-decker  bus  or  a  cowboy  hat—both  are  symbols  of 
national   cultures.   But   national   symbols   are   easy   because   most 
nations  have  a  clear  sense  of  culture  that  has  been  reinforced  and 
repeated  for  generations.  It  is  not  a  company  or  organization  that 
decides  what,  it  symbols  mean,  it  is  the  group  outside  the  mega-
phone,  in  the  chaotic  marketplace,  who  decide.  If, based  on  the 

COMMUNICATION IS NOT ABOUT SPEAKING, IT’S LISTENING 
183 
things  they  see  and  hear,  the  outsiders  can  clearly  and  consistently 
report  what  an  organization  believes,  then,  and  only  then,  can  a 
symbol start to take on meaning. It is the truest test of how effective 
a  megaphone  has  been  produced—when  clarity  is  able to  filter  all 
the  way  through  the  organization  and  come  to  life  in  everything 
that comes out of it. 
Go   back   to   Apple's   "1984"   commercial   at   the   beginning   of 
chapter 9. For those who have seen it, does it make you think about 
Apple and its products or do you simply like the sentiment? Or the 
line "Think Different," does it speak to you? 
If you're a Mac customer, you probably loved this commercial; it 
may even give you goose bumps when you watch it—a surefire test 
that the WHY is connecting with you on a visceral or limbic level. In 
fact, this commercial, after you learned it was from Apple, may have 
reinforced your decision to buy a Mac, whether for the first time  or 
the  tenth  time.  This  commercial,  like  all  Apple's  advertising,  is  one 
of  the  things  Apple  has  said  or  done  that  reinforces  what  they 
believe. It is every bit consistent  with the clear belief  we know they 
embody.  And  if  the  commercial  speaks  to  you  and  you're  not  an 
Apple  lover,  odds  are  you  still  like  the  idea  of  thinking  differently. 
The  message  of  that  ad  is  one  of  the  things  Apple  does  to  tell  their 
story.  It  is  one  of  the  WHATs  to  their  WHY.  It  is  a  symbol.  It  is  for 
these  reasons  that  we  say  of  a  piece  of  advertising;  "It  really  speaks 
to me." It's not really speaking to you, it's speaking to the millions of 
people  who  saw  the  ad.  When  we  say  that  something  like  that 
"speaks  to  me,"  what  we're  really  saying  is,  through  all  this  clutter 
and noise, I can hear that. I can hear it and I will listen. This is what 
it means for a message that comes out of the megaphone to resonate. 
Everything  that  comes  out  of  the  base  of  the  megaphone  serves 
as  a  way  for  an  organization  to  articulate  what  it believes.  What  a 
company  says  and  does  are  the  means  by  which  the  company 
speaks.  Too  many  companies  put  a  disproportionate  amount  of 

START WITH WHY 
184 
weight  on  their  products  or  services  simply  because  those  are  the 
things  that  bring  in  the  money.  But  there  are  many more  things  at 
the base of the megaphone that play an equal role in speaking to the 
outside world. Though products  may drive  sales, they alone cannot 
create  loyalty.  In  fact,  a  company  can  create  loyalty  among  people 
who aren't even customers. I spoke favorably of Apple long before I 
bought  one.  And  I  spoke  disparagingly  of  a  certain PC  brand  even 
though I'd been buying their products for years. 
Apple's  clarity,  discipline  and  consistency—their  ability  to  build 
a  megaphone,  not  a  company,  that  is  clear  and  loud—is  what has 
given them the ability to command such loyalty. They are accused of 
having  a  cultlike  following.  Those  inside  the  company  are  often 
accused of following the "cult of Steve." All of these compliments or 
insults are indications that others have taken on the cause and made 
it their own. That experts describe their products and marketing as a 
"lifestyle" reinforces that people who love Apple products are using 
WHAT  Apple  does  to  demonstrate  their  own  personal  identity.  We 
call    it    "lifestyle    marketing"    because    people    have    integrated 
commercial  products  into  the  style  of  their  lives. Apple,  with  great 
efficiency,  built  a  perfectly  clear  megaphone,  leveraged  the  Law  of 
Diffusion  and  invited  others  to  help  spread  the  gospel.  Not  for  the 
company, for themselves. 
Even  their  promotions  and  partnerships  serve  as  tangible  proof 
of  what  they  believe.  In  2003  and  2004,  Apple  ran  a  promotion  for 
iTunes  with Pepsi—the cola branded as "the choice of the next gen-
eration."  It  made  sense  that  Apple  would  do  a  deal with  Pepsi,  the 
primary  challenger  to  Coca-Cola,  the  status  quo.  Everything  Apple 
does,  everything  they  say  and  do,  serves  as  tangible  proof  of  what 
they  believe.  The  reason  I  use  Apple  so  extensively  throughout  this 
book  is  that  Apple  is  so  disciplined  in  HOW  they  do  things  and  so 
consistent  in  WHAT  they  do  that,  love  them  or  hate them,  we  all 
have a sense of their WHY. We know what they believe. 

COMMUNICATION IS NOT ABOUT SPEAKING, IT’S LISTENING 
185 
Most  of  us  didn't  read  books  about  them.  We  don't  personally 
know Steve Jobs. We haven't spent time roaming the halls of Apple's 
headquarters  to  get  to  know  their  culture.  The  clarity  we  have  for 
what  Apple  believes  comes  from  one  place  and  one  place  only: 
Apple.  People  don't  buy  WHAT  you  do,  they  buy  WHY  you  do  it, 
and Apple says and does only the things they believe. If WHAT you 
do  doesn't  prove  what  you  believe,  then  no  one  will  know  what 
your  WHY  is  and  you'll  be  forced  to  compete  on  price,  service, 
quality, features and benefits; the stuff of commodities. Apple has a 
clear  and  loud  megaphone  and  is  exceptionally  good at  commu-
nicating its story. 
The Celery Test 
In order to improve HOW and WHAT we do, we constantly look to 
what  others  are  doing.  We  attend  conferences,  read books,  talk  to 
friends and colleagues to get their input and advice, and sometimes 
we   are   also   the   dispensers   of   advice.   We   are   in   pursuit   of 
understanding the best practices of others to help guide us. But it is 
a  flawed  assumption  that  what  works  for  one  organization  will 
work for another. Even if the industries, sizes and market conditions 
are the same, the notion that "if it's good for them, it's good for us" is 
simply not true. 
I know  of a company with  an amazing culture. When  asked; the 
employees  say  they  love  that  all  the  conference  rooms  have  ping-
pong  tables  in  them.  Does  that  mean  that  if  you  were  to  put  ping-
pong   tables   in   all   your   conference   rooms   your   culture   would 
improve?  Of  course  not.  But  this  is  an  example  of  "best  practices." 
The  idea  that  copying  WHAT  or  HOW  things  are  done  at  high-
performing  organizations  will  inherently  work  for  you  i$  just  not 
true.   Like   the   Ferrari   and   the   Honda,   what   is   good for   on<f 

START WITH WHY 
186 
company is  not necessarily good for another. Put simply, best prac-
tices are not always best. 
It  is  not  just  WHAT  or  HOW  you  do  things  that  matters;  what 
matters  more  is  that  WHAT  and  HOW  you  do  things  is consistent 
with your WHY. Only then will your practices indeed be best. There 
is  nothing  inherently  wrong  with  looking  to  others to  learn  what; 
they do, the challenge is knowing what practices or advice to follow. 
Fortunately,  there  is  a  simple  test  you  can  apply  to  find  out  exactly 
WHAT and HOW is right for you. It's a simple metaphor called the 
Celery Test. 
Imagine  you  go  to  a  dinner  party  and  somebody  comes  up  to 
you  and  says,  "You  know  what  you  need  in  your  organization? 
M&M's. If you're not using M&M's in your business, you're leaving 
money on the table." 
Somebody  else  comes  up  to  you  and  says,  "You  know  what  you 
need?  Rice  milk.  The  data  shows  that  all  the  people  are  buying  rice 
milk these days. You should be selling rice milk in this economy." 
While  you're  standing  over  the  punch  bowl,  yet  another  person 
offers some sage advice. "Oreo cookies," he says. "We made millions; 
from implementing  Oreo cookies in our  organization. You've got to 
do it." 
Still  somebody  else  comes  up  to  you  and  says,  "Celery.  You've 
got to get into celery." 
You  get  all  this  great  advice  from  all  these  highly  accomplished 
people.  Some  of  them  are  in  the  same  industry.  Some  of  them  are 
more successful than you. Some of them have offered similar advice 
to others with great success. Now, what do you do? 
You  go  to  the  supermarket  and  you  buy  celery,  rice milk,  Oreos 
and M&M's. You spend a lot of time at the supermarket walking the 
aisles.  You  spend  a  lot  of  money  because  you  buy  everything.  But 
you  may  or  may  not  get  any  value  from  some  or  all  of  these 
products;   there   are   no   guarantees.   Worse,   if   you're   budget-

COMMUNICATION IS NOT ABOUT SPEAKING, IT’S LISTENING 
187 
constrained, you had to whittle down your choices again. And then 
which do you choose? 
But  one  thing's  for  sure:  when  you're  standing  in  line  at  the 
supermarket  with  all  of  these  items  in  your  arms,  your  celery,  rice 
milk,  Oreos  and  M&Ms,  nobody  can  see  what  you  believe.  What 
you do is supposed serve as the tangible proof of what you believe, 
and you bought everything. 
But  what  if  you  knew  your  WHY  before  you  went  to  the  super-
market? What if your WHY is to do only things that are healthy? To 
always do the things that are good for your body? You'll get all the 
same  good  advice  from  all  the  same  people,  the  only  difference  is, 
the  next  time  you  go  to  the  supermarket,  you'll  buy  only  rice  milk 
and celery. Those are the only products that make sense. It's not that 
the  other  advice  isn't  good  advice,  it's  just  not  good  for  you.  The 
advice doesn't fit. 
Filtering your decisions through your WHY, you spend less time 
at   the   supermarket   and   you   spend   less   money,   so   there's   an 
efficiency  advantage  also.  You're  guaranteed  to  get  value  out  of  all 
the  products  you  bought.  And,  most  importantly,  when  you're 
standing in line with your products in your arms, everybody can see 
what  you  believe.  With  only  celery  and  rice  milk  it's  obvious  to 
people  walking  by  what  you  believe.  "I  can see  that  you  believe  in 
looking  after  your  health,"  they  may  say  to  you.  "I  feel  the  same 
way| I have a question for you." Congratulations. You just attracted 
^  customer,  an  employee,  a  partner  or  a  referral  simply  by  making 
the  right  decisions.  Simply  ensuring  that  WHAT  you do  proves 
what  you  believe  makes  it  easy  for  those  who  believe  what  you 
believe  to  find  you.  You  have  successfully  communicated  your 
WHY* based on WHAT you do. 
This  is  an  idealistic  concept  and  in  the  real  world  that  level  of 
discipline  is  not  always  possible.  I  understand  that  sometimes  we 
have to make short-term decisions to pay bills or get some shortterm 

START WITH WHY 
188 
advantage.  That's  fine.  The  Celery  Test  still  applies.  If  you  want  a 
piece of chocolate cake, go right ahead. The difference is*; when you 
start  with  WHY,  you  know  full  well  that  the  chocolate'  cake  is  a 
short-term  decision  that  doesn't  fit  with  your  beliefs.  You're  under 
no  illusions.  You  know  you  are  only  doing  it  for  the  short-term 
sugar  rush  and  you'll  have  to  work  a  little  harder to  get  it  out  of 
your  system.  It's  astounding  the  number  of  businesses  I  see  that 
view an opportunity as the one that's going to set them on a path to 
glory, only to have it blow up or slowly deflate over time.; They see 
the  chocolate  cake  and  can't  resist.  Starting  with WHY  not  only 
helps you know which is the right advice for you to follow, but also 
to  know  which  decisions  will  put  you  out  of  balance.  You  can; 
certainly  make  those  decisions  if  you  need  to,  but don't  make  too! 
many  of  them,  otherwise  over  time,  no  one  will  know  what  you; 
believe. 
But  here's  the  best  part.  As  soon  as  I  told  you  the  WHY,  you 
knew  that  we  were  going  to  buy  only  celery  and  rice  milk  even  be-
fore you read it. As soon as I gave you the filter, as soon as I said the 
WHY, you knew exactly what decisions to make before I said so. 
That's called scale. 
With a WHY clearly stated in an organization, anyone within the 
organization can make a decision as clearly and as accurately as the 
founder.  A  WHY  provides  the  clear  filter  for  decision-making.  Any 
decisions—hiring,  partnerships,  strategies  and  tactics—should  all 
pass the Celery Test. 
 
The More Celery You Use, the More Trust You Earn 
Mark  Rubin  is  a  good  parent.  He  spends  a  lot  of  time  with  his  two 
daughters,  Lucy  and  Sophie.  One  Saturday  afternoon,  his  wife, 
Claudine,  took  Lucy  to  a  friend's  for  a  playdate  and  Mark  was  left 
home  to  look  after  five-year-old  Sophie.  Feeling  a little  tired,  Mark 
really wanted to just have a little time to relax on the couch and not 

COMMUNICATION IS NOT ABOUT SPEAKING, IT’S LISTENING 
189 
have  to  play  tree  house  again  for  the  ninth  time  that  day.  To  keep 
Sophie  occupied,  he  opted  for  the  TV  as  babysitter.  Mark  had  two 
brand-new  DVDs  to  choose  from.  He'd  seen  neither  of  them  and 
heard  nothing  about  either  of  them  in  the  press  or from  any  of  his 
friends  with  small  children.  Mark  didn't  feel  like watching  the  car-
toon  himself—the  plan  was  to  let  Sophie  enjoy  the  movie  in  one 
room  while  he  watched  something  in  the  other  room. One  of  the 
DVDs  was  from  some  company  he'd  never  heard  of  and the  other 
was from Disney. Which one did he put  in  the  DVD  player? Which 
one would you put in the DVD player? 
The answer is so clear it verges on a silly question, but let's con-
sider  the  facts  for  fun.  Both  DVDs  were  cartoons.  Both  were  age- 
appropriate  for  a  child.  Both  had  a  couple  of  good reviews  on  the 
packaging.  The  only  difference  is  that  we  trust  the  DVD  from  Dis-
ney.  Disney  is  not  a  perfect  company.  They  occasionally  have  man-
agement  and  leadership  issues.  Their  stock  price  sometimes  goes 
down.  They  have  lawsuits  filed  against  them  all  the  time.  Some 
would lump them in with all the other nasty corporations that work 
to appease Wall Street. So why would we trust them? 
Disney  operates  with  a  clear  sense  of  WHY—they  exist  to  pro-
mote good, clean family fun and everything they say and do has, for 
decades,  worked  to  prove  it.  The  reason  we  trust  Disney  is  simple; 
we  know  what  they  believe.  They  pass  the  Celery  Test.  They  have 
been  so  consistent  over  time  in  everything  they  say  and  do  that 
parents   trust   them   enough   to   expose   their   children to   Disney 
content  without  vetting  it  first.  This  has  nothing to  do  with  quality 
products. This is not rational. 
Southwest  Airlines  also  passes  the  Celery  Test.  The  company  has 
been  so  consistent  over  time  that  we  almost  know  what  to  expect 
from  them.  The  airline  offers  only  open  seating  on its  flights,  for 
example.  It's  one  of  the  things  they  do  to  prove  that  they  believe  in 
freedom.  It  just  makes  sense.  A  company  that  serves  the  common 

START WITH WHY 
190 
man  and  values  equality  for  all  so  much  could  never  have  a  class 
structure.  If  Delta  or  United  or  Continental  tried to  do  the  same,  it 
wouldn't make sense, open seating doesn't fit their way. 
In Violation of Celery 
Birkenstock  sandals,  tie-dyed  T-shirts,  daisy  chains  and  a  VW  van. 
All  are  symbols  of  the  hippie  ideals  of  peace,  love  and  all  things 
vegetarian.  So  it  was  a  bit  of  a  surprise  in  2004  when  Volkswagen 
introduced  a  $70,000  luxury  model  to  their  lineup. The  company 
famous for putting a vase for fresh flowers on the dashboard of their 
new  Beetle  introduced  the  Phaeton  in  an  attempt  to compete  with 
high-end  luxury  cars,  including  the  Mercedes-Benz  S-Class  and  the 
BMW  7  Series.  The  V-8,335-horsepower  car  boasted  some  of  the 
most  advanced  features  in  the  industry,  like  an  air  compressor 
suspension system and a draftless four-zone climate control. It even 
included  an  electronically  controlled  shiatsu  massage  system  in  the 
seats.   The   car   was   an   astounding   achievement.   It   was   very 
comfortable  and  was  a  monster  on  the  road,  outperforming  other 
more  established  luxury  cars  in  its  class.  The  critics  loved  it.  But 
there was a small problem. Despite all the facts and figures, features 
and   benefits,   and   regardless   of   the   world-renowned German 
engineering, few people bought one. It just didn't make sense. What 
VW had done was inconsistent with what we knew them to believe. 
Volkswagen,  which  translated  means  "people's  car," had  spent 
generations  making cars for you and me. Everyone knew  what  VW 
stood  for—power  to  the  people.  It  brought  its  cause  to  life  in  prod-
ucts that were all about quality that the average person could afford. 
In   a   single   swoop   of   German   ingenuity,   VW   had   been put 
completely  out  of  balance.  This  is  not  like  Dell  coming  out  with  an 
mp3  player  or  United  starting  the  low-cost  airline Ted.  In  those 
cases, we had no idea what the companies' WHYs were. Absent any 

COMMUNICATION IS NOT ABOUT SPEAKING, IT’S LISTENING 
191 
knowledge or feeling for their WHY, we couldn't bring ourselves to 
buy  products  from  them  that  went  anything  beyond  WHAT  they 
do.  In  this  case,  VW  has  a  clear  WHY,  but  WHAT  they  produced 
was completely misaligned. They failed the Celery Test. 
Toyota and Honda knew this better than Volkswagen. When they 
decided  to  add  luxury  models  to  their  lineups,  they  created  new 
brands, Lexus and Acura respectively, to do it. Toyota had become a 
symbol  of  efficiency  and  affordability  to  the  general  population. 
They had built their business on a suite of low-cost cars. They knew 
that the  market would  not  pay a premium for a luxury car with the 
same  name  or  with  the  same  logo  on  the  hood.  Although  a  luxury 
car, Lexus is still another  WHAT to Toyota's WHY. It still embodies 
the  same  cause  as  the  Toyota-branded  cars,  and  the values  of  the 
company are the same. The only difference is WHAT they are doing 
to bring that cause to life. 
The  good  news  is,  VW  hasn't  made  the  same  mistake  again,  and 
their  WHY  remains  clear.  But  if  a  company  tries  too  many  times  to 
"seize market opportunities" inconsistent with their WHY over time, 
their  WHY  will  go  fuzzy  and  their  ability  to  inspire  and  command 
loyalty will deteriorate. 
What  companies  say  and  do  matters.  A  lot.  It  is  at the  WHAT 
level that a cause is brought to life. It is at this level that a company 
speaks to the outside world and it is then that we can learn what the 
company believes. 
 
 

 
192 

 
193 
PART 5 
THE BIGGEST 
CHALLENGE 
IS SUCCESS 
 
 

 
194 

 
195 
11 
 
WHEN WHY GOES FUZZY 
Goliath Flinched 
"A  lot  of  what  goes  on  these  days  with  high-flying companies  and 
these  overpaid  CEOs,  who're  really  just  looting  from  the  top  and 
aren't  watching  out  for  anybody  but  themselves,  really  upsets  me. 
It's  one  of  the  main  things  wrong  with  American  business  today." 
This  is  the  sentiment  passed  down  from  the  founder of  one  of  the 
most vilified companies in recent history. 
Raised  on  a  farm  in  America's  heartland,  he  came  of  age  during 
the Great Depression. This probably explained his predisposition for 
frugality.  Standing  five  feet  nine  inches  and  weighing  only  130 
pounds  when  he  played  football  in  high  school,  Sam Walton,  the 
founder  of  Wal-Mart,  learned  early  the  value  of  working  hard. 
Working hard leads to winning. And as the quarterback on his high 
school  football  team,  he  won  a  lot.  In  fact,  they  went  on  to  become 
state  champs.  Whether  through  hard  work,  luck  or  just  an  unflap-
pable  optimism,  Walton  got  so  used  to  winning  all  the  time  that  he 
couldn't  fully  visualize  what  losing  looked  like.  He  simply  couldn't 
imagine  it.  Walton  even  philosophized  that  always  thinking  about 
winning  probably  became  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy for  him.  Even 

START WITH WHY 
196 
during  the  Depression,  he  had  a  highly  successful  paper  route  that 
earned him a decent wage for the times. 
By  the  time  Sam  Walton  died,  he  had  taken  Wal-Mart from  a; 
single  store  in  Bentonville,  Arkansas,  and  turned  it  into  a  retail 
colossus  with  $44  billion  in  annual  sales  with  40  million  people 
shopping  in  the  stores  per  week.  But  it  takes  more than  a  competi-
tive  nature,  a  strong  work  ethic  and  a  sense  of  optimism  to  build  a 
company  big  enough  to  equal  the  twenty-third-largest  economy  in 
the world. 
Walton  wasn't  the  first  person  with  big  dreams  to  start  a  small 
business.  Many  small  business  owners  dream  of  making  it  big.  I 
meet a lot of entrepreneurs and it is amazing how many of them tell 
me   their   goal   is   to   build   a   billion-dollar   company.   The   odds; 
however,  are  significantly  stacked  against  them.  There  are  27.7 
million  registered  businesses  in  the  United  States today  and  only  a 
thousand of them get to be FORTUNE 1000 companies, which these 
days  requires  about  $1.5  billion  in  annual  revenues.  That
1 
means 
that less than .004 percent of all companies make it to the illustrious 
list.  To  have  such  an  impact,  to  build  a  company  to  a  size  where  it 
can drive markets, requires something more. 
Sam  Walton  did  not  invent  the  low-cost  shopping  model.  The 
five-and-dime  variety  store  concept  had  existed  for  decades  and 
Kmart and Target opened their doors the same year as Wal-Mart, in 
1962.  Discounting  was  already  a  $2  billion  industry  when  Walton 
decided to build his first Wal-Mart. There was plenty of competition 
beyond  Kmart and  Target,  some  of it  much better funded and with 
better locations and seemingly better opportunities for success than 
Wal-Mart.  Sam  Walton  didn't  even  invent  a  better  way  of  doing 
things than everyone else. He admitted to "borrowing" many, of his 
ideas about the business from Sol Price, the founder of Fed- Mart, a 
retail discounter founded in Southern California during the 1950s. 

WHEN WHY GOES FUZZY 
197 
Wal-Mart  was  not  the  only  retail  establishment  capable  of  offering 
low  prices  either.  Price,  as  we've  already  established,  is  a  highly 
effective  manipulation.  But  it  alone  does  not  inspire  people  to  root 
for you and give you the undying loyalty needed to create a tipping 
point to grow to massive proportions. Being cheap does not inspire 
employees  to  give  their  blood,  sweat  and  tears.  Wal-Mart  did  not 
have  a  lock  on  cheap  prices  and  cheap  prices  are  not  what  made  it 
so beloved and ultimately so successful. 
For  Sam  Walton,  there  was  something  else,  a  deeper purpose, 
cause  or  belief  that  drove  him.  More  than  anything else,  Walton 
believed  in  people.  He  believed  that  if  he  looked  after  people, 
people  would  look  after  him.  The  more  Wal-Mart  could  give  to 
employees,  customers  and  the  community,  the  more  that  employ-
ees,  customers  and  the  community  would  give  back  to  Wal-Mart. 
"We're all working together; that's the secret," said Walton. 
This  was  a  much  bigger  concept  than  simply  "passing  on  the 
savings." To Walton, the inspiration came not simply from customer 
service but from service itself. Wal-Mart was WHAT Walton built to 
serve  his  fellow  human  beings.  To  serve  the  community,  to  serve 
employees and to serve customers. Service was a higher cause. 
The  problem  was  that  his  cause  was  not  clearly  handed  down 
after  he  died.  In  the  post-Sam  era,  Wal-Mart  slowly  started  to 
confuse   WHY   it   existed—to   serve   people—with   HOW   it did 
business—to  offer  low  prices.  They  traded  the  inspiring  cause  of 
serving  people  for  a  manipulation.  They  forgot  Walton's  WHY  and 
their  driving  motivation  became  all  about  "cheap." In  stark  contrast 
to the founding cause that Wal-Mart originally embodied, efficiency 
and  margins  became  the  name  of  the  game.  "A  computer  can  tell 
you  down  to  the  dime  what  you've  sold,  but  it  can  never  tell  you 
how  much  you  could  have  sold,"  said  Walton.  There  is  always  a 
price  to  pay  for  the  money  you  make,  and  given  Wal-Mart's  sheer 
size,  that  cost  wasn't  paid  in  dollars  and  cents  alone.  In  Wal-Mart's 

START WITH WHY 
198 
case, forgetting their founder's WHY has come at a very high human 
cost. Ironic, considering the company's founding cause. 
The  company  once  renowned  for  how  it  treated  employees  and 
customers  has  been  scandal-ridden  for  nearly  a  decade.  Nearly 
every scandal has centered on how poorly they treat their customers 
and their employees. As of December 2008, Wal-Mart faced seventy-
three   class-action   lawsuits   related   to   wage   violations   and'   has 
already  paid  hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars  in  past  judgments  and 
settlements.  A  company  that  believed  in  the  symbiotic  relationship 
between  corporation  and  community  managed  to  drive for  wedge 
between  themselves  and  so  many  of  the  communities  which  they 
operate. There was a time when legislators would help pass laws to 
allow  Wal-Mart  into  new  communities;  now  lawmakers rally  to 
keep  them  out.  Fights  to  block  Wal-Mart  from  opening  new  stores 
have  erupted  across  the  country.  In  New  York,  for  example,  city 
representatives in Brooklyn joined forces with labor unions to block 
the store because of Wal-Mart's reputation for unfair labor practices. 
In one  of the more ironic violations  of Walton's founding beliefs, 
Wal-Mart  has  been  unable  to  laugh  at   itself  or  learn  from  its 
scandals.   "Celebrate   your   successes,"   said   Walton. "Find   some 
humor  in  your  failures.  Don't  take  yourself  so  seriously.  Loosen  up 
and  everybody  around  you  will  loosen  up."  Instead  of  admitting 
that  things  aren't  what  they  used  to  be,  Wal-Mart  has  done  the 
opposite. 
The  way  Wal-Mart  thinks,  acts  and  communicates  since  the 
passing  of  their  inspired  leader  is  not  a  result  of  their  competitor 
outsmarting  them  either.  Kmart  filed  for  Chapter  11  bankruptcy
 
protection  in  2002,  and  then  merged  with  Sears  three  years  later. 
With  about  $400  billion  in  annual  sales,  Wal-Mart  still  sells  more 
than  six  times  as  much  as  Target  each  year.  In  fact,  looking  beyond 
discount  retailing,  Wal-Mart  is  now  the  largest  supermarket  in  the 
world  and  sells  more  DVDs,  bicycles  and  toys  than  any  other 

WHEN WHY GOES FUZZY 
199 
company  in  America.  Outside  competition  is  not  what's  hurting 
their  company.  The  greatest  challenge  Wal-Mart  has  faced  over  the 
year comes from one place: itself. 
For Wal-Mart, WHAT they do and HOW they are doing it; hasn't 
changed. And it has nothing to do with Wal-Mart being 
"corporation"; they were one of those before the love started decline. 
What has changed is that their WHY went fuzzy. And we all know 
it. A company once so loved is simply not as loved any-
1
 
more.  The  negative  feelings  we  have  for  the  company  are  real,  but 
the part of the brain that is able to explain why we feel so negatively 
toward  them  has  trouble  explaining  what  changed.  So  we  rational-
ize  and  point  to  the  most  tangible  things  we  can  see—size  and 
money. If we, as outsiders, have lost clarity of Wal-Mart's WHY, it's 
a good sign that the WHY  has gone fuzzy inside the company also. 
If  it's  not  clear  on  the  inside,  it  will  never  be  clear  on  the  outside. 
What is clear is that the Wal-Mart of today is not the Wal-Mart that 
Sam Walton built. So what happened? 
It's too easy to say that all they care about is their bottom line. All 
companies are in business to make money, but being successful at it 
is not the reason why things change so drastically. That only points 
to a symptom. Without understanding the reason it happened in the 
first  place,  the  pattern  will  repeat  for  every  other  company  that 
makes  it  big.  It  is  not  destiny  or  some  mystical  business  cycle  that 
transforms   successful   companies   into   impersonal   goliaths.   It's 
people. 
Being Successful vs. Feeling Successful 
Every   year   a   group   of   high-performing   entrepreneurs   get 
together   at   MIT's   Endicott   House   just   outside   Boston.   This 
Gathering  of  Titans,  as  they  call  themselves,  is  not  your  average 
entrepreneurial  conference.  It's  not  a  boondoggle. There's  no  golf, 
there's  no  spa  and  there  are  no  expensive  dinners. Every  year  forty 

START WITH WHY 
200 
to fifty business owners spend four days listening, from early in the 
morning   until   well   into   the   evening.   An   assortment of   guest 
speakers  is  invited  to  present  their  thinking  and  ideas,  and  then 
there are discussions led by some of the attendees. 
I had the honor of attending the Gathering of Titans as a guest a 
few  years  ago.  I  expected  it  to  be  another  group  of  entrepreneurs 
getting  together  to  talk  shop.  I  expected  to  hear  discussions  and 
presentations about maximizing profits and improving systems. But 
what  I  witnessed  was  profoundly  different.  In  fact,  it  was  the 
complete opposite. 
On  the  first  day,  someone  asked  the  group  how  many of  them 
had  achieved  their  financial  goals.  About  80  percent  of  the  hands 
went  up.  I  thought  that  alone  was  quite  impressive.  But  it  was  the 
answer to the next question that was so profound. With their hands 
still  in  the  air,  the  group  was  then  asked,  "How  many  of  you  fed 
successful?" And 80 percent of the hands went down. 
Here  was  a  room  full  of  some  of  America's  brightest  entrepre-
neurs, many of them multimillionaires, some of whom don't need to 
work anymore if they don't want to, yet most of them still didn't feel 
like  they  had  succeeded.  In  fact,  many  of  them  reported  that  they'd 
lost  something  since  they  started  their  businesses.  They  reminisced 
about the days when they didn't have any money and were working 
out  of  their  basements,  trying  to  get  things  going.  They  longed  for 
the feeling they used to have. 
These amazing entrepreneurs were at a point in their lives where 
they realized that their businesses were about much more than sell-
ing   stuff   or   making   money.   They   realized   the   deep   personal 
connection  that  existed  between  WHAT  they  do  and  WHY  they 
were  doing  it.  This  group  of  entrepreneurs  gathered  to  discuss 
matters of WHY, and at times it was quite intense. 
Unlike  the  typical  Type-A-personality  entrepreneurs,  the  Titans 
were not  there to prove anything to each other. There was a feeling 

WHEN WHY GOES FUZZY 
201 
of  immense  trust  rather  than  ruthless  competition. And  because  of 
this feeling, every  member of the group  was  willing to express vul-
nerability  that  they  probably  rarely  let  show  the  rest  of  the  year. 
Over the course of the event, every person in the room would shed a 
tear or two at least once. 
It  doesn't  interest  me  to  write  about  the  idea  that  money  doesn't 
buy  happiness,  or  in  this  case,  the  feeling  of  success.  This  is  neither 
profound  nor  a  new  idea.  What  does  interest  me,  however,  is  the 
transition  that  these  entrepreneurs  went  through.  As  their  com-
panies  grew,  and  they  became  more  and  more  successful,  what 
changed? 
It  is  easy  to  see  what  they  gained  over  the  course of  their  careers—
we can easily count the  money, the size  of the office, the number  of 
employees, the size of their homes, market share and the number of 
press  clippings.  But  the  thing  they  had  lost  is  much  harder  to 
identify.  As  their  tangible  success  grew,  something  more  elusive 
started  to  dissipate.  Every  single  one  of  these  successful  business 
owners knew WHAT they did. They knew HOW they did it. But for 
many, they no longer knew WHY. 
Achievement vs. Success 
For  some  people,  there  is  an  irony  to  success.  Many  people  who 
achieve  great  success  don't  always  feel  it.  Some  who  achieve  fame 
talk  about  the  loneliness  that  often  goes  with  it. That's  because  suc-
cess  and  achievement  are  not  the  same  thing,  yet  too  often  we  mis-
take  one  for  the  other.  Achievement  is  something  you  reach  or 
attain, like a goal. It is something tangible, clearly defined and mea-
surable. Success, in contrast, is a feeling or a state of being. "She feels 
successful. She is successful," we say, using the verb to be to suggest 
this  state  of being.  While  we  can  easily  lay  down  a  path  to  reach  a 
goal, laying down a path to reach that intangible feeling of success is 
more  elusive.  In  my  vernacular,  achievement  comes  when  you 

START WITH WHY 
202 
pursue  and  attain  WHAT  you  want.  Success  comes  when  you  are 
clear  in  pursuit  of  WHY  you  want  it.  The  former  is motivated  by 
tangible  factors  while  the  latter  by  something  deeper  in  the  brain, 
where we lack the capacity to put those feelings into words. 
Success comes when we wake up every day in that never-ending 
pursuit  of  WHY  we  do  WHAT  we  do.  Our  achievements, WHAT 
we do, serve as the milestones to indicate we are on the right path. It 
is  not  an  either/or—we  need  both.  A  wise  man  once  said,  "Money 
can't  buy  happiness,  but  it  pays  for  the  yacht  to  pull  alongside  it." 
There   is   great   truth   in   this   statement.   The   yacht   represents 
achievement;  it  is  easily  seen  and,  with  the  right plan,  completely 
attainable.  The  thing  we  pull  alongside  represents that  hard-to- 
define  feeling  of  success.  Obviously,  this  is  much harder  to  see  and 
attain.  They  are  distinct  concepts,  and  sometimes  they  go  together 
and sometimes they don't. More importantly, some people, while in 
pursuit  of  success,  simply  mistake  WHAT  they  achieve  as  the  final 
destination.  This  is  the  reason  they  never  feel  satisfied  no  matter 
how big their  yacht  is,  no  matter how much  they achieve. The false 
assumption  we  often  make  is  that  if  we  simply  achieve  more,  the 
feeling of success will follow. But it rarely does. 
In the course of building a business or a career, we become more 
confident  in  WHAT  we  do.  We  become  greater  experts in  HOW  to 
do it. With each achievement, the tangible measurements of success 
and the feeling of progress increase. Life is good. However, for most 
of  us,  somewhere  in  the  journey  we  forget  WHY  we  set  out  on  the 
journey  in  the  first  place.  Somewhere  in  the  course  of  all  those 
achievements    an    inevitable    split    happens.    This    is    true    for 
individuals  and  organizations  alike.  What  the  Endicott  entrepre-
neurs  experienced  as  individuals  was  the  same  transition  that  Wal- 
Mart  and  other  big  companies  either  have  gone  through  or  are 
going  through.  Because  Wal-Mart  operates  at  such  an  immense 

WHEN WHY GOES FUZZY 
203 
scale,  the  impact  of  their  fuzzy  WHY  is  felt  on  a  greater  scale.  Em-
ployees, customers and the community will feel it also. 
Those with an ability to never lose sight of WHY, no matter how 
little  or  how  much  they  achieve,  can  inspire  us.  Those  with  the 
ability  to  never  lose  sight  of  WHY  and  also  achieve  the  milestones 
that keep everyone focused in the right direction are the great lead-
ers.  For  great  leaders,  The  Golden  Circle  is  in  balance.  They  are  in 
pursuit of WHY, they hold themselves accountable to HOW they do 
it  and  WHAT  they  do  serves  as  the  tangible  proof  of  what  they 
believe.  But  most  of  us,  unfortunately,  reach  a  place  where  WHAT 
we are doing and WHY we are doing it eventually fall out of balance. 
We  get  to  a  point  when  WHY  and  WHAT  are  not  aligned.  It  is  the 
separation of the tangible and the intangible that marks the split. 
 

 
204 
 

 
205 
12 
 
SPLIT HAPPENS 
Wal-Mart  started  small.  So  did  Microsoft.  So  did  Apple.  So  did 
General  Electric  and  Ford  and  almost  every  other  company  that 
made  it  big.  They  didn't  start  by  acquisition  or  spin-off,  or  achieve 
mass  scale  overnight.  Nearly  every  company  or  organization  starts 
the  same  way:  with  an  idea.  No  matter  whether  an  organization 
grows  to  become  a  multibillion-dollar  corporation  like  Wal-Mart  or 
fails in the first few years, most of them started with a single person 
or small group of people who had an idea. Even the United States of 
America started the same way. 
At  the  beginning,  ideas  are  fueled  by  passion—that very  com-
pelling  emotion  that  causes  us  to  do  quite  irrational  things.  That 
passion drives many people to make sacrifices so that a cause bigger 
than  themselves  can  be  brought  to  life.  Some  drop  out  of  school  or 
quit a perfectly good job with a good salary and benefits to try to go 
it  alone.  Some  work  extraordinarily  long  hours  without  a  second 
thought,  sometimes  sacrificing  the  stability  of  their  relationships  or 
even  their  personal  health.  This  passion  is  so  intoxicating  and 
exciting  that  it  can  affect  others  as  well.  Inspired  by  the  founder's 
vision,  many  early  employees  demonstrate  classic  early-  adopter 
behavior.  Relying  on  their  gut,  these  first  employees  also  quit  their 

START WITH WHY 
206 
perfectly good jobs and accept lower salaries to join an organization 
with a 90 percent statistical chance of failing. But the statistics don't 
matter;  passion  and  optimism  reign  and  energy  is  high.  Like  all 
early adopters, the behavior of those who join early says more about 
them than it does about the company's prospects. 
The  reason  so  many  small  businesses  fail,  however, is  because 
passion  alone  can't  cut  it.  For  passion  to  survive,  it  needs  structure. 
A  WHY  without  the  HOWs,  passion  without  structure, has  a  very 
high  probability  of  failure.  Remember  the  dot-com  boom?  Lots  of 
passion,  but  not  so  much  structure.  The  Titans  at  Endicott  House, 
however,  did  not  face  this  problem.  They  knew  how  to  build  the 
systems and processes to see their companies grow. They are among 
the  statistical  10  percent  of  small  businesses  that  didn't  fail  in  their 
first  three  years.  In  fact,  many  of  them  went  on  to  do  quite  well. 
Their  challenge  was  different.  Passion  may  need  structure  to  sur-
vive, but for structure to grow, it needs passion. 
This is what I witnessed at the Gathering of Titans: I saw a room 
full  of  people  with  passion  enough  to  start  businesses,  and  with 
knowledge  enough  to  build  the  systems  and  structures  to  survive 
and  even  do  very  well.  But  having  spent  so  many  years  focused  on 
converting a vision  into a viable business, many started to fixate on 
WHAT the organization did or HOW to do it. Poring over financial 
or  some  other  easily  measured  result,  and  fixating on  HOW  they 
were  to  achieve  those  tangible  results,  they  stopped  focusing  on 
WHY  they  started  the  business  in  the  first  place.  This  is  also  what 
has  happened  at  Wal-Mart.  A  company  obsessed  with  serving  the 
community became obsessed with achieving its goals. 
Like Wal-Mart, the Endicott entrepreneurs used to think, act and 
communicate  from  the  inside  out  of  The  Golden  Circle—
5 
from 
WHY  to  WHAT.  But  as  they  grew  more  successful,  the process 
reversed.  WHAT  now  comes  first  and  all  their  systems  and  pro-
cesses are in pursuit of those tangible results. The reason the change 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
207 
happened  is  simple—they  suffered  a  split  and  their WHY  went 
fuzzy. 
 
The  single  greatest  challenge  any  organization  will  face  is  .  .  . 
success. When the company is small, the founder will rely on his gut 
to  make  all  the  major  decisions.  From  marketing  to product,  from 
strategy to tactics, hiring and firing, the decisions the founder makes 
will, if he trusts his gut, feel right. But as the organization grows, as 
it becomes more successful, it becomes physically impossible for one 
person  to  make  every  major  decision.  Not  only  must others  be 
trusted and relied upon to make big decisions, but those people will 
also  start  making  hiring  choices.  And  slowly  but  surely,  as  the 
megaphone grows, the clarity of WHY starts to dilute. 
Whereas  gut  was  the  filter  for  early  decisions,  rational  cases  and 
empirical data often serve as the sole basis for later decisions. For all 
organizations  that  go  through  the  split,  they  are  no  longer  inspired 
by  a  cause  greater  than  themselves.  They  simply  come  to  work, 
manage systems and work to reach certain preset goals. There is  no 
longer a cathedral to build. The passion is gone and inspiration is at 
a  minimum.  At  that  point,  for  most  who  show  up  every  day  what 
they  do  is  just  a  job.  If  this  is  how  the  people  on  the  inside  feel, 
imagine   how   those   on   the   outside   feel.   It   is   no   wonder   that 
 

START WITH WHY 
208 
manipulations start to dominate not only how the company  sells its 
wares,  but  even  how  they  retain  employees.  Bonuses,  promotions 
and  other  enticements,  even  instilling  fear  in  people,  become  the 
only way to hold on to talent. That's hardly inspiring. 
This  diagram  depicts  the  life  of  an  organization.  The  top  line 
represents   the   growth   of   WHAT   the   organization   does.   For   a 
company,  that  measurement  is  usually  money—profits,  revenues, 
EBITA, share price or growth in market share. But the metric can be 
anything,   depending   on   what   the   organization   does. If   the 
organization  rescues  lost  puppies,  then  the  metric would  be  the 
number  of  puppies  successfully  rescued.  It  is  inherently  simple  to 
measure  the  growth  of  WHAT  an  organization  does.  WHATs,  after 
all, are tangible and easy to count. 
The second line represents  the WHY, the clarity  of the founding; 
purpose,   cause   or   belief.   The   goal   is   to   ensure   that   as   the 
measurement of WHAT grows, the clarity of the WHY stays closely 
aligned.   Put   another   way,   as   the   volume   of   the   megaphone 
increases, the message traveling through it must stay clear. 
The  volume  of  the  megaphone  comes  solely  from  growth of 
WHAT. As this metric grows, any company can become a "leading" 
company. But it is the ability to inspire, to maintain clarity of WHY, 
that  gives  only  a  few  people  and  organizations  the ability  to  lead. 
The  moment  at  which  the  clarity  of  WHY  starts  to  go  fuzzy  is  the 
split. At this point organizations may be loud, but they are no longer 
clear. 
When organizations are small, WHAT they do and WHY they do 
it are in close parallel. Born out of the personality of the founder it is 
relatively  easy  for  early  employees  to  "get  it."  Clarity  of  WHY 
understood   because   the   source   of   passion   is   near—in   fact   it 
physically comes to work every day. In most small businesses all the 
employees   are   all   crammed   into   the   same   room   and   socialize 
together.  Simply  being  around  a  charismatic  founder  allows  that 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
209 
feeling  of  being  a  part  of  something  special  to  flourish.  Although 
they may be some efficiencies to be gained, for small businesses that 
at  perfectly  comfortable  staying  small,  the  need  to  articulate  the 
WHY  is  not  as  important.  For  organizations  that  want  to  pass  the 
School Bus Test, to become billion-dollar organizations or work at a 
scale  large  enough  to  shift  markets  or  society,  the  need  to  manage 
through the split is paramount. 
The School Bus Test is a simple  metaphor. If a founder or leader 
of  an  organization  were  to  be  hit  by  a  school  bus, would  the  orga-
nization  continue  to  thrive  at  the  same  pace  without  them  at  the 
helm?  So  many  organizations  are  built  on  the  force of  a  single  per-
sonality  that  their  departure  can  cause  significant  disruption.  The 
question  isn't  if  it  happens—all  founders  eventually  leave  or  die— 
it's just a question of when and how prepared the organization is for 
the inevitable departure. The challenge isn't to cling to the leader; it's 
to find effective ways to keep the founding vision alive forever. 
To  pass  the  School  Bus  Test,  for  an  organization  to  continue  to 
inspire  and  lead  beyond  the  lifetime  of  its  founder,  the  founder's 
WHY  must  be  extracted  and  integrated  into  the  culture  of  the 
company. What's more, a strong  succession plan  should aim to find 
a leader inspired by the founding cause and ready to lead it into the 
next  generation.  Future  leaders  and  employees  alike  must  be  in-
spired  by  something  bigger  than  the  force  of  personality  of  the 
founder and must see beyond profit and shareholder value alone. 
Microsoft has experienced  a split,  but  is  not so far down  the line 
that it can't be put back on track. There was a time not too long ago 
that people at Microsoft showed up at work every day to change the 
world.  And  they  did.  What  Microsoft  achieved,  putting  a  PC  on 
every  desk,  dramatically  changed  the  way  we  live.  But  then  their 
WHY  went  fuzzy.  Few  people  at  the  company  today  are  instructed 
to do everything they can to help people be more productive so that 

START WITH WHY 
210 
they  can  achieve  their  greatest  potential.  Instead,  Microsoft  became 
just a software company. 
If  you  visit  Microsoft's  headquarters  in  Redmond,  Washington, 
you will find that although their WHY has gone fuzzy, it is not lost. 
That  sense  of  a  cause,  that  desire  to  change  the  world  again,  is  still 
there,  but  it  has  become  unfocused,  wrapped  up  in  HOW  and 
WHAT  they  do.  Microsoft  has  a  remarkable  opportunity  to  clarify 
their  WHY  and  regain  the  inspiration  that  took  them  to  where  they 
are  today.  If  they  do  not,  if  all  they  do  is  manage  the  WHAT  and 
continue to ignore the WHY, they will end up looking like America 
Online,  a  company  so  far  past  the  split  that  their WHY  is  indeed 
lost. There is barely a hint of the original WHY left anymore. 
America  Online  used  to  inspire.  Like  Google  today, it  was  the 
hot  company  to  work  for.  People  clamored  to  move  to  Virginia  to 
work  for  this  amazing  company  that  was  changing  the  rules  of 
business. And it was true that, like all inspiring companies, AOL set 
in  motion  changes  that  profoundly  altered  how  we  do  almost  ev-
erything. They inspired a nation to get online. Their cause was clear 
and their decisions were governed by their WHY. Their goal was to 
get more people online, even if their decisions in pursuit of that goal 
wreaked havoc on their business in the short term. With their WHY 
in  focus,  AOL  pulled  ahead  of  their  competition  by deciding  to 
change from hourly pricing for Internet access to unlimited monthly 
pricing,  a  decision  that  created  so  much  traffic  it  shut  down  their 
servers.  Given  the  impact,  the  decision  was  neither  practical  nor 
rational,  but  it  was  the  right  choice  to  help  bring  their  cause  to  life. 
That   their   systems   shut   down   with   the   additional   traffic   only 
pushed them to work harder to cope with it, to ensure that America 
could, in fact, get and stay online. 
In  those  days,  having  an  AOL  e-mail  address  was  a  point  of 
pride—a  sign  of  being  one  of  those  who  was  a  part  of  the  Internet 
revolution. These days, still having an AOL e-mail address is a sym-

SPLIT HAPPENS 
211 
bol  of  having  been  left  behind.  That  the  meaning  of  something  as 
simple  as @aol.com  has  changed  so  dramatically  is  additional  proof 
that  the  company's  cause  has  long  since  departed.  Absent  a  clear 
WHY, size and momentum are all AOL has to keep them going. The 
company is not inspiring anymore, not to those who work there and 
not  to  those  on  the  outside.  We  don't  talk  about  them  like  we  used 
to  and  we  certainly  don't  feel  the  same  way  about  them  either.  We 
don't  compare  them  to  Google  or  Facebook  or  any  of the  other 
industry-changing  companies  of  today.  Like  a  massive  freight  train 
with brakes applied, it will still take miles for this train to come to a 
complete stop. It's simple physics. At best AOL's size will help them 
putter  along,  but  without  a  more  compelling  purpose,  cause  or 
belief,  the  company  is  simply  a  collection  of  stuff.  It  will  probably 
end  up  being  chopped  up  and  sold  off  for  scrap  (technology  or 
customers),  which  is  a  sad  reality  considering  how inspiring  AOL 
used to be. 
It  is  not  a  coincidence  that  successful  entrepreneurs  long  for  the 
early  days.  It  is  no  accident  that  big  companies  talk  about  a  "return 
to  basics."  What  they  are  alluding  to  is  a  time  before  the  split.  And 
they would be right. They  do indeed need to return to a time when 
WHAT  they  did  was  in  perfect  parallel  to  WHY  they  did  it.  If  they 
continue down the path of focusing on their growth of WHAT at the 
expense  of  WHY—more  volume  and  less  clarity—their  ability  to 
thrive  and  inspire  for  years  to  come  is  dubious  at best.  Companies 
like  Wal-Mart,  Microsoft,  Starbucks,  the  Gap,  Dell and  so  many 
others  that  used  to  be  special  have  all  gone  through  a  split.  If  they 
cannot  recapture  their  WHY  and  reinspire  those  inside  and  outside 
their organization, every one of them will end up looking more like 
AOL than the companies they were. 
 

START WITH WHY 
212 
What Gets Measured, Gets Done 
In  the  fall  of  her  freshman  year  in  college,  Christina  Harbridge  set 
out  to  find  a  part-time  job.  Intrigued  by  the  prospect  of  working  in 
the antiques business, she  answered a newspaper ad in Sacramento 
to  do  office  work  for  a  "collector."  Harbridge  soon  found  out,  how-
ever, that the job was filing papers for a collections agent, and even 
then she wasn't entirely sure what that meant. 
The  collections  office  consisted  of  a  huge  room  with  dozens  of 
phone stations, each staffed by a debt collector making call after call 
to  a  long  list  of  businesses  and  individuals  who  owed  money.  The 
setup  of  the  room  meant  there  was  no  privacy—everyone  could 
hear  everyone  else's  calls.  Harbridge  was  immediately  taken  by  the 
harshness  of  the  tone  that  all  the  collectors  used with  those  from 
whom  they  aimed  to  collect  unpaid  debts.  "They  would  hound 
them,  and  practically  threaten  them,"  she  said.  "They  would  do 
anything it took to get information from them." 
Harbridge   recognized   that   the   owner   of   the   company and 
collectors  were  all  kind,  gracious  people.  They  helped  each  other 
out,  listened  to  each  other's  problems  and  even  joined  together 
sponsor a homeless family during the holidays. But when they wait 
on  the  phone  to  collect  a  debt,  these  same  people  turned  passive-
aggressive,  rude  and  often  mean.  It's  not  because  they  were  bad 
people, it's because they were incentivized to be that way. 
Their   officious   behavior   made   perfect   sense.   "What gets 
measured  gets  done,"  as  well-known  sales  coach  Jack  Daly  says. 
And ii| the world of debt collecting, the callers were given bonuses 
b  on  how  much  money  they  collected.  This  has  resulted  in  any 
industry  that  threatens,  badgers,  hounds  and  provokes.  It  did  take 
long  until  Harbridge  found  herself  adopting  the  same  attitude 
whenever  she  talked  with  debtors.  "I  began  treating  people  on  the 
phone the way everybody else in the office treated them," she sail 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
213 
Feeling like WHAT she was doing was completely out of balance 
with  her  WHY,  Harbridge  decided  there  had  to  be  another  way  to 
go  in  my  head  that  I  was  going  to  start  an  agency  that  collected  by 
being  nice,"  she  said.  People  in  the  collections  business  though 
Harbridge naive, if not crazy. And maybe she was. 
In  1993,  Harbridge  moved  to  San  Francisco  and  started  her  own 
collections  firm,  Bridgeport  Financial,  steeped  in the  belief  that 
agents  would  have  more  success  treating  people  with  respect  that 
badgering  them.  Harbridge  built  her  company  on  her WHY—that 
everyone  has  a  story  and  everyone  deserves  to  be  listened  to  Her 
approach  was  to  have  her  agents  try  to  establish  rapport  with  the 
debtor on the other end of the phone in the course of a three minute 
conversation. The goal was to learn everything they could about the 
person's  circumstances:  Did  they  have  the  means  to pa]  the  debt? 
Would they honor a payment plan? Was the reason for the failure to 
pay reflective of a short-term situation? "We would get people to tell 
us  the  truth,"  she  said.  "Sure,  we  had  a  legal  department,  but  we 
tried  to  avoid  using  it."  Harbridge  knew,  however, that  no  matter 
her  intentions,  if  she  measured  the  results  the  same  was  as  others, 
the same awful behavior would result. So she came with an entirely 
new  way  to  incentivize  her  people.  She  found  a  way to  measure 
WHY. 
At  Bridgeport  Financial,  bonuses  were  not  given  for  the  amount 
of  money  that  was  collected;  they  were  given  based on  how  many 
"thank you" cards her agents sent out. This is harder than it sounds. 
Sending out a card thanking someone for the time they spent talking 
on  the  phone  requires  a  few  things.  First,  Harbridge  had  to  hire 
people who believed what she believed. She had to hire good fits. If 
her  employees  didn't  believe  that  everyone  deserves  to  be  listened 
to, it  wouldn't  work.  Only  good-fit  hires would be capable of creat-
ing  an  environment  on  the  telephone  that  would  actually  warrant 
sending  a  thank-you  card,  even  though  the  purpose  of  the  call  was 

START WITH WHY 
214 
to  ask  for  money.  Harbridge  measured  WHY  her  company  existed, 
not WHAT they did, and the result was a culture in which compas-
sion was valued above all. 
But  what  about  the  other  results?  What  about  her  financial  re-
sults,  the  ones  most  businesses  pursue  first?  Bridgeport  Financial 
collected 300 percent more than the industry average. What's  more, 
most of the people and companies who were initially being pursued 
ended  up  doing  more  business  with  the  original  company  that  sent 
the  collections  agency  after  them  in  the  first  place.  This  is  almost 
unprecedented in the collections industry. 
Harbridge's business succeeded not just because she knew WHY 
she was doing what she was doing, but because she found a way to 
measure  the  WHY.  The  company's  growth  was  loud  and her  cause 
was clear. She started with WHY and the rest followed. 
Most   organizations   today   use   very   clear   metrics   to track   the 
progress  and  growth  of  WHAT  they  do—usually  it's  money.  Un-
fortunately, we have very poor measurements to ensure that a WHY 
stays  clear.  Dwayne  Honore  has  for  the  past  ten  years  run  his  own 
commercial  construction  company  in  Baton  Rouge,  Louisiana,  a 
trade he learned from his father. A leader with a deep sense of pur-
pose, he devised some years ago a brilliant system to ensure that his 
values  are  reinforced  in  his  company's  culture.  He figured  out  how 
to  measure  something  most  people  can  only  pay  lip  service  to: 
work-life balance. Honore believes that people should not spend all 
their  time  at  work,  but  rather  they  should  work  to spend  more  of 
their time with their families. 
Every  employee  at  Honors  Construction  is  required  to  clock  in 
the  morning  and  clock  out  in  the  evening.  But  there's  a  catch  They 
must  clock  in  between  8:00-8:30 a.m.  and  out  by  5:00-5:3|j P.M.  Stay 
any later and they are taken out of a bonus pool. Because employees 
know they have to leave by 5:30 p.m., wasted time has dropped to a 
minimum.  Productivity  is  high  and  turnover  in  low. Consider  how 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
215 
much  you  get  done  the  day  before  you  go  on  vacation.  Now 
imagine every day is like that. That's what Dwayne Honore figured 
out how to do. Because he figured out how to mea$ sure a value he 
holds  dear,  that  value   is  embraced.  Most   importantly,  because 
Honore's actions pass the Celery Test, others can clearly see what he 
believes. 
Money  is  a  perfectly  legitimate  measurement  of  goods  sold  or 
services  rendered.  But  it  is  no  calculation  of  value.  Just  because 
somebody  makes  a  lot  of  money  does  not  mean  that  he  necessarily 
provides  a  lot  of  value.  Likewise,  just  because  somebody  makes 
little  money  does  not  necessarily  mean  he  provides only  a  little 
value. Simply by measuring the number of goods sold or the money 
brought  in  is  no  indication  of  value.  Value  is  a  feeling,  not  a 
calculation.  It  is  perception.  One  could  argue  that  a  product  with 
more bells and whistles that sells for less is the greater value. But by 
who’s standard? 
My uncle used to make tennis rackets. His rackets were made the 
exact  same  factory  as  a  name-brand  racket.  They  were  made  of  the 
same  material  on  the  same  machine.  The  only  difference  with  that 
when my uncle's rackets came off the assembly line, they didn’t put 
the  well-known  brand  logo  on  the  product.  My  uncle's  racked  sold 
for less money, in the same big-box retailer, next to the name brand 
rackets.  Month  after  month,  the  name-brand  rackets outsold  the 
generic-brand  ones.  Why?  Because  people  perceived  greater  value 
from the name-brand rackets and felt just fine paying a premium for 
that  feeling.  On  a  strictly  rational  scale,  the  generic  rackets  offered 
better  value.  But  again,  value  is  a  perception,  not  a  calculation, 
which is the reason companies make such a big deal about investing 
in  their  brand.  But  a  strong  brand,  like  all  other intangible  factors 
that contribute to the perception of value, starts with a clear sense of 
WHY. 

START WITH WHY 
216 
If  those  outside  the  megaphone  share  your  WHY  and  if  you  are 
able  to  clearly  communicate  that  belief  in  everything  you  say  and 
do, trust emerges and  value is perceived.  When that  happens,  loyal 
buyers  will  always  rationalize  the  premium  they  pay  or  the  incon-
venience they suffer to get that feeling. To them, the sacrifice of time 
or  money  is  worth  it.  They  will  try  to  explain  that  their  feeling  of 
value comes from quality or features or some other easy-to- point-to 
element, but it doesn't. Those are external factors and the feeling they 
get comes completely from inside them. When people can point to a 
company  and  clearly  articulate  what  the  company  believes  and  use 
words  unrelated to price,  quality, service and features, that is  proof 
the  company  has  successfully  navigated  the  split.  When  people 
describe  the  value  they  perceive  with  visceral,  excited  words  like 
"love," that is a sure sign that a clear sense of WHY exists. 
Good Successions Keep the WHY Alive 
There  were  three  words  missing  from  Bill  Gates's  goodbye  speech 
when he  officially left Microsoft in June 2008. They are three words 
he probably doesn't even realize need to be there. 
"I'll be back." 
Though  Gates  abdicated  his  role  as  CEO  of  Microsoft  to  Steve 
Ballmer  in  2000  to  lend  more  time  and  energy  to  the  Bill  and 
Melinda Gates Foundation, he still maintained a role and a presence 
at  the  Microsoft  headquarters  in  Redmond,  Washington.  His  plan 
was  always  to  completely  leave  the  company  in  the  care  of  others, 
but  like  a  lot  of  founders,  Gates  forgot  to  do  one thing  that  would 
allow his plan to work. This one oversight could have a devastating 
impact  on  Microsoft  and  may  even  require  him  to  come  back 
someday to right the ship he built. 
Bill   Gates   is   special.   Not   just   because   of   his   brain   or   his 
management  style.  Though  important,  those  two  things  alone  are 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
217 
not  the  formula  for  building  a  $60  billion  corporation  from  scratch. 
Like  all  visionary  leaders,  Bill  Gates  is  special  because  he  embodies 
what he believes. He is the personification of Microsoft's WHY. And 
for  that  reason,  he  serves  as  a  physical  beacon,  a reminder  of  WHY 
everyone comes to work. 
When  Gates  founded  Microsoft  with  Paul  Allen  in  1975,  he  did 
so to advance a higher cause: if you give people the right tools, and 
make  them  more  productive,  then  everyone,  no  matter  their  lot  in 
life,  will  have  an  opportunity  to  achieve  their  real  potential,  "A  PC 
in  every  home  and  on  every  desk,"  he  envisioned;  remarkable  from 
a  company  that  didn't  even  make  PCs.  He  saw  the  PC as  the  great 
equalizer.  Microsoft's  most  successful  software,  Windows,  allowed 
anyone  to  have  access  to  powerful  technology.  Tools  like  Word, 
Excel  and  PowerPoint  gave  everyone  the  power  to  realize  the 
promise  of  the  new  technology—to  become  more  efficient  and 
productive.  Small  businesses,  for  example,  could  look  and  act  like 
big businesses. Microsoft's software helped Gates advance his cause 
to empower the "everyman." 
Make  no  mistake,  Microsoft  has  done  more  to  change the  world 
than  Apple.  Though  we  are  drawn  to  Apple's  well-deserved  rep-
utation for innovation and challenging the business models of more 
than  one  industry,  it  is  Microsoft  that  was  responsible  for  the 
advancement  of  the  personal  computer.  Gates  put  a  PC  on  every 
desk  and  in  doing  so  he  changed  the  world.  As  the  physical  em-
bodiment  of  the  company's  WHY,  the  "everyman"  who  fulfilled  an 
amazing potential, what happens now that he's gone? 
Gates  himself  has always  held that  he receives a "disproportionate" 
amount  of  attention  for  his  role  at  Microsoft,  much  of  it,  of  course, 
due   to   his   exceptional   wealth.   Like   all   inspired   leaders,   he 
recognizes that his role is to lead the cause, but it is others who will 
be  physically  responsible  for  bringing  that  cause  to  life.  Martin  Lu-
ther  King  Jr.  could  not  have  changed  America  walking  across  a 

START WITH WHY 
218 
bridge  in  Selma,  Alabama,  with  five  prominent  civil  rights  leaders. 
It  took  the  thousands  of  people  marching  behind  them  to  spur 
change.   Gates   recognizes   the   need   for   people   to   produce   real 
change, but he neglected to remember that any effective movement, 
social  or  business,  needs  a  leader  to  march  in  the front,  preaching 
the  vision  and  reminding  people  WHY  they  showed  up in  the  first 
place.  Though  King  needed  to  cross  the  bridge  from Selma  on  his 
march to Montgomery, it was what it meant to cross the bridge that 
mattered. Likewise in business, though profit and shareholder value 
are  valid  and  essential  destinations,  they  do  not  inspire  people  to 
come to work. 
Although  Microsoft  went  through  the  split  years  ago,  changing 
from a company that intended to change the world into a company 
that  makes  software,  having  Gates  hanging  around  helped  Micro-
soft maintain at least a loose sense of WHY they existed. With Gates 
gone,  Microsoft  does  not  have  sufficient  systems  to  measure  and 
preach  their  WHY  anymore.  This  is  an  issue  that  will  have  an  ex-
ponential impact as time passes. 
Such  a  departure  as  Gates's  is  not  without  precedent  among 
companies  with  equally  visionary  leaders.  Steve  Jobs,  the  physical 
embodiment  of  the  rabble-rousing  revolutionary,  a  man  who  also 
personifies his company's WHY, left Apple in 1985 after a legendary 
power struggle with Apple's president, John Sculley, and the Apple 
board of directors. The impact on Apple was profound. 
Originally hired by Jobs in 1983, Sculley was a perfectly capable 
executive  with  a  proven  track  record.  He  know  WHAT to  do  and 
HOW  to  do  things.  He  was  considered  one  of  the  most  talented 
marketing  executives  around,  having  risen  quickly  through  the 
ranks  of  PepsiCo.  At  Pepsi,  he  created  the  wildly  successful  Pepsi 
Challenge taste test advertising campaign, leading Pepsi to overtake 
Coca-Cola for the first time. But the problem was, Sculley was a bad 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
219 
fit at Apple. He ran the company as a business and was not there to 
lead the cause. 
It is worth considering how such a bad fit as Sculley even got the 
job at Apple in the first place. Simple—he was manipulated. Sculley 
did  not  approach  Jobs  and  ask  to  be  a  part  of  Apple's  cause.  The 
way  the  real  story  unfolded  made  the  fallout  almost  predictably 
Jobs knew he needed help. He knew he needed a HOW guy to help 
him  scale  his  vision.  He  approached  Sculley,  a  man with  a  solid 
r£sum6, and said, "Do you want to sell sugar water your  whole life 
or  do  you  want  to  change  the  world?"  Playing  off  Sculley's  ego 
aspirations  and  fears,  Jobs  completed  a  perfectly  executed  manipu-
lation.  And  with  it,  Jobs  was  ousted  from  his  own  company  a  fen* 
years later. 
Apple thrived on Steve Jobs's fumes for a few years as businesses 
started  buying  up  Macintoshes  and  software  developers  continued 
to  create  new  software.  But  it  wouldn't  be  long  until  the  company 
would  begin  to  falter.  Apple  just  wasn't  what  it  used  to  be.  It  had 
gone through the split and ignored it. The WHY was getting fuzzier 
and  fuzzier  with  each  passing  year.  The  inspiration  was  gone. 
Literally. 
With  a  capable  executive  like  Sculley  running  the  business,  there 
was no  one to lead the cause. New products  would be "less revolu-
tionary  and  more  evolutionary,"  reported  FORTUNE  magazine  at 
the time, "some people might even call them dull." Weary of Apple's 
"right  brain"  ways,  Sculley  reorganized  the  company  repeatedly, 
each time trying to get back what Apple clearly had lost. He brought 
in a  new executive  staff to  help. But all they were doing  was trying 
to  manage  HOW  the  company  worked  when  it  was  the  WHY  that 
needed attention. Needless to say, morale was dismal. It wasn't until 
Jobs returned in 1997 that everyone inside and outside the company 
was reminded WHY Apple existed. With clarity back, the company 
quickly reestablished its power for innovation, for thinking different 

START WITH WHY 
220 
and,  once  again,  for  redefining  industries.  With  Jobs  at  the  helm 
again,  the  culture  for  challenging  the  status  quo, for  empowering 
the  individual,  returned.  Every  decision  was  filtered  through  the 
WHY,  and  it  worked.  Like  most  inspiring  leaders,  Jobs  trusted  his 
gut  over outside advice. He was regularly criticized for not  making 
mass-market  decisions,  such  as  letting  people  clone  the  Mac.  He 
couldn't;  those  actions  violated  what  he  believed. They  failed  the 
Celery Test. 
When  the  person  who  personifies  the  WHY  departs  without 
clearly  articulating  WHY  the  company  was  founded  in  the  first 
place, they leave no clear cause for their successor to  lead. The new 
CEO will come aboard to run the company and will focus attention 
on  the  growth  of  WHAT  with  little  attention  to  WHY.  Worse,  they 
may  try  to  implement  their  own  vision  without  considering  the 
cause  that  originally  inspired  most  people  to  show up  in  the  first 
place.  In  these  cases,  the  leader  can  work  against the  culture  of  the 
company instead of leading or building upon it. The result is dimin-
ished  morale,  mass  exodus,  poor  performance  and  a  slow  and 
steady transition to a culture of mistrust and every-man-for-himself. 
It  happened  at  Dell.  Michael  Dell,  too,  had  a  cause  when  he 
started  his  company.  From  the  start,  he  focused  on efficiency  as  a 
way  of  getting  more  computing  power  into  more  hands.  Unfortu-
nately,  it  was  a  cause  that  he  too  forgot,  and  then  didn't  communi-
cate  well  enough  before  he  stepped  down  as  CEO  of  Dell  Corp.  in 
July  2004.  After  the  company  started  to  weaken—customer  service, 
for one, plummeted—he came back in less than three years. 
Michael  Dell  recognized  that  without  him  present  to  keep  energy 
focused on the reason Dell Corp. was founded, the company became 
more  obsessed  with  WHAT  at  the  expense  of  WHY.  "The  company 
was too focused on the short term, and the balance of priorities was 
way too leaning toward things that deliver short- term results—that 
was   the   major   root   cause,"   Dell   told   the  New  York  Times   in 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
221 
September  2007.  The  company  had  in  fact  become  so  dysfunctional 
that  some  managers  were  compelled  to  falsify  earnings  reports 
between  2003  and  2006  in  order  to  meet  sales  targets,  suggesting  a 
corporate  culture  that  put  undue  pressure  on  managers  to  meet 
bottom-line  targets.  In  the  meantime,  the  company  had  missed 
significant market shifts, most notably the potential of the consumer 
market, and lost its edge  with component  suppliers as well. And in 
2006,  Hewlett-Packard  swept  past  Dell  as  the  largest  seller  of  PCs 
worldwide.  Dell  had  gone  through  the  split  and  failed  to  recognize 
the reason it wasn't the company it used to be. 
Starbucks  is  another  good  example.  In  2000,  Howard Schultz 
resigned  as  CEO  of  Starbucks,  and  for  the  first  time  in  its  history 
and  despite  50  million  customers  per  week,  the  company  started  to 
crack. 
If  you  look  back  at  the  history  of  Starbucks,  it  thrived  not  be-
cause  of  its  coffee  but  because  of  the  experience  it  offered  to  cus-
tomers. It was Schultz who brought that WHY to the company when 
he  arrived  in  1982,  ten  years  after  Gordon  Bowker, Jerry  Baldwin 
and Zev Siegl first started selling coffee beans in Seattle. In the early 
days it was about the coffee. Schultz, frustrated that the founders of 
Starbucks couldn't  see the larger vision,  set  out to put  the company 
on  a  new  course,  the  course  that  ultimately  turned Starbucks  into 
the  company  we  know  today.  Schultz  had  been  enamored  of  the 
espresso bars of Italy, and it was his vision of building a comfortable 
environment between work and home, the "third space," as he called 
it,  that  allowed  Starbucks  to  single-handedly  create  a  coffee-shop 
culture  in  the  United  States  that  had  until  then  only  existed  on 
college campuses. 
That  was  the  time  when  Starbucks  stood  for  something.  It  reflected 
an  underlying  belief  about  the  world.  It  was  that  idea  that  people 
bought,  not  the  coffee.  And  it  was  inspiring.  But  Starbucks,  like  so 
many  before  it,  went  through  the  inevitable  split. They,  too,  forgot 

START WITH WHY 
222 
about  WHY  the  company  was  founded  and  started  focusing  on  the 
results  and  the  products.  There  was  a  time  when  Starbucks  offered 
the  option  to  sip  your  coffee  out  of  a  ceramic  cup and  eat  your 
Danish off a ceramic plate. Two perfect details that helped bring the 
company's  belief  to  life  in  the  place  between  work and  home.  But 
ceramic  crockery  is  expensive  to  maintain  and  Starbucks  did  away 
with  it,  favoring  the  more  efficient  paper  cups.  Though  it  saved 
money,  it  came  at  a  cost:  the  erosion  of  trust.  Nothing  says  to  a 
customer  "We  love  you,  now  get  out"  like  a  paper  cup.  It  was  no 
longer  about  the  third  space.  It  had  become  about  the  coffee. 
Starbucks's  WHY  was  going  fuzzy.  Thankfully,  Schultz  was  there, 
the  physical  embodiment  of  the  WHY,  to  remind  people  of  the 
higher cause. But in 2000 he left, and things got worse. 
The  company  had  grown  from  fewer  than  1,000  stores to  13,000 
in only ten years. Eight years and two CEOs later, the company was 
dangerously  overextended  just  as  it  was  facing  an  onslaught  of 
competition   from   McDonald's,   Dunkin'   Donuts   and   other   un-
expected  places.  In  a  now  famous  memo  that  Schultz wrote  to  his 
successor,  Jim  Donald,  just  months  before  returning  to  take  the 
helm, he implored Donald to "make the changes necessary to evoke 
the  heritage,  the  tradition  and  the  passion  that  we  all  have  for  the 
true  Starbucks  experience."  The  reason  the  company was  floun-
dering  was  not  that  it  grew  too  fast,  but  that  Schultz  had  not  prop-
erly infused his WHY into  the organization so that the organization 
could  manage  the  WHY  without  him.  In  early  2008,  Schultz  re-
placed  Donald  with  a  leader  who  could  better  steer the  company 
back to a time before the split: himself. 
None  of  these  executives  are  considered  God's  gift to  manage-
ment.  Steve  Jobs's  paranoia,  for  example,  is  well  documented,  and 
Bill  Gates  is  socially  awkward.  Their  companies  are  thousands  of 
people  deep  and  they  alone  can't  pull  all  the  strings  or  push  all  the 
buttons  to  make  everything  work  properly.  They  rely  on  the  brains 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
223 
and  the  management  skills  of  teams  of  people  to  help  them  build 
their  megaphones.  They  rely  on  people  who  share  their  cause.  In 
this  respect,  they  are  no  different  from  other  executives.  But  what 
they  all  have  in  common,  something  that  not  all  CEOs  possess,  is 
that they physically embody the cause around which they built their 
companies.  Their  physical  presence  reminds  every  executive  and 
every  employee  WHY  they  show  up  to  work.  Put  simply:  they  in-
spire.  Yet,  like  Bill  Gates,  these  inspired  leaders  have  all  failed  to 
properly  articulate  their  cause  in  words  that  others  could  rally 
around  in  their  absence.  Failing  to  put  the  movement  into  hard 
words  leaves  them  as  the  only  ones  who  can  lead  the  movement. 
What happens when Jobs or Dell or Schultz leave again? 
For companies of any size, success is the greatest challenge. As 
Microsoft  grew,  Gates  stopped  talking  about  what  he  believed  and
! 
how  he  was  going  to  change  the  world  and  started  talking  about 
what  the  company  was  doing.  Microsoft  changed.  Founded  as  a 
company  that  believed  in  making  people  more  productive  so  they 
could  achieve  their  highest  potential,  Microsoft  became  a  company 
that   simply   made   software   products.   Such   a   seemingly   subtle 
change  affects  behaviors.  It  alters  decisions.  And it  impacts  how  a 
company  structures  itself  for  the  future.  Though  Microsoft  had 
changed  since  its  founding,  the  impact  was  never  as  dramatic 
because at least Bill Gates was there, the physical embodiment of the 
cause that inspired his executives and employees. 
Microsoft is just  one of  the tangible things Gates has  done  in  his 
life  to  bring  his  cause  to  life.  The  company  is  one  of  the  WHATs  to 
his WHY. And now he's off to do something else that also embodies 
his  cause—to  use  the  Gates  Foundation  to  help  people  around  the 
world  wake  up  every  day  to  overcome  obstacles  so  they  too  can 
have  an  opportunity  achieve  their  potential.  The  only  difference  is 
he's not doing it with software anymore. Steve Ballmer, a smart man 
by  all  accounts,  does  not  physically  embody  Gates's  vision  of  the 

START WITH WHY 
224 
world. He has the image of a powerful executive who sees numbers, 
competitors  and  markets.  He  is  a  man  with  a  gift  for  managing  the 
WHAT  line.  Like  John  Sculley  at  Apple,  Jim  Donald  at  Starbucks 
and Kevin Rollins at Dell—all the CEOs who replaced the visionary 
founders  or  executives—Ballmer  might  be  the  perfect  man  to  work 
alongside a visionary, but is he the perfect man to replace one? 
The  entire  culture  of  all  these  companies  was  built  around  one 
man's  vision.  The  only  succession  plan  that  will  work  is  to  find  a 
CEO who believes in and wants to continue to lead that movement, 
not  replace  it  with  their  own  vision  of  the  future.  Ballmer  knows 
how to rally the company, but can he inspire it? 
Successful  succession  is  more  than  selecting  someone  with  an 
appropriate skill set—it's about finding someone  who is in lockstep 
with the original cause around which the company was founded. 
Great  second  or  third  CEOs  don't  take  the  helm  to  implement  their 
own vision  of the future; they pick up the original banner and lead 
the  company  into  the  next  generation.  That's  why  we  call  it  succes-
sion, not replacement. There is a continuity of vision. 
One  of  the  reasons  Southwest  Airlines  has  been  so  good  at  suc-
cession  is  because  its  cause  is  so  ingrained  in  its  culture,  and  the 
CEOs  who  took  over  from  Herb  Kelleher  also  embodied  the  cause. 
Howard Putnam was the first president of Southwest after Kelleher. 
Though he was a career airline guy, it was not his resume that made 
him so well suited to lead the company. He was a good fit. Putnam 
recounts  the  time  he  met  with  Kelleher  to  interview  for  the  job. 
Putnam  leaned  back  in  his  chair  and  noticed  that  Kelleher  had 
slipped  his  shoes  off  under  the  desk.  More  significantly,  Putnam 
noticed  the  hole  in  one  of  Kelleher's  socks.  It  was  at  that  point  that 
Putnam felt he was the right man for the job. He loved that Kelleher 
was just like everyone else. He too had holes in his socks. 
Although  Putnam  felt  Southwest  was  right  for  him,  how  do  we 
know  if he was right for Southwest? I  had a chance to spend  half a 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
225 
day  with  Putnam  to  talk.  At  one  point  in  the  afternoon  I  suggested 
we  take  a  break  and  grab  a  Starbucks.  The  mere  suggestion  in-
censed  him.  "I'm  not  going  to  Starbucks!"  he  cracked.  "I'm  not 
paying  five  dollars  for  a  cup  of  coffee.  And  what  the  heck  is  a 
Frappuccino  anyway?"  It  was  at  that  point  I  realized  how  perfect  a 
fit  Putnam  was  for  Southwest.  He  was  an  everyman.  A  Dunkin' 
Donuts  guy.  He  was  a  perfect  man  to  take  the  torch from  Kelleher 
and charge forward. Southwest inspired him. In the case of Howard 
Putnam,  Kelleher  hired  somebody  who  could  represent  the  cause, 
not reinvent it. 
Today it has become so acculturated there that it's almost automatic. 
The  same  could  be  said  for  Colleen  Barrett,  who  became  president 
of  Southwest  in  2001,  some  thirty  years  after  she  was  working  as 
Kelleher's  secretary  in  his  San  Antonio  law  firm.  By  2001,  the 
company had nearly 30,000 employees and a fleet of 344 planes. By 
the  time  she  took  over,  Barrett  says  that  running  the  company  had 
become  "a  very  collective  effort."  Kelleher  stopped  his  day-to-day 
involvement  in  the  company,  but  left  a  corporate  culture  so  strong 
that   his   presence   in   the   hallways   was   no   longer   needed.   The 
physical   person   had   largely   been   replaced   by   the   folklore   of 
Kelleher.  But  it  is  the  folklore  that  has  helped  keep  the  WHY  alive. 
Barrett  freely  admits  she's  not  the  smartest  executive  out  there.  She 
is  self-deprecating  in  her  personal  assessment,  in fact.  But  as  the 
leader  of  the  company,  being  the  smartest  was  not  her  job.  Her  job 
was to lead the cause. To personify the values and remind everyone 
WHY they are there. 
The good news is, it will be easy to know if a successor is carry-
ing the right torch. Simply apply the Celery Test and see if what the 
company  is  saying  and  doing  makes  sense.  Test  whether  WHAT 
they  are  doing  effectively  proves  WHY  they  were  founded.  If  we 
can't  easily  assess  a  company's  WHY  simply  from  looking  at  their 

START WITH WHY 
226 
products,  services,  marketing  and  public  statements,  then  odds  are 
high that they don't know what it is either. If they did, so would we. 
When the WHY Goes, WHAT Is All You'll Have Left 
On  April  5,1992,  at  approximately  eight  in  the  morning,  Wal-Mart 
lost its WHY. On that day, Sam Walton, Wal-Mart's inspired leader, 
the man who embodied the cause around which he built the world's 
largest  retailer,  died  in  the  University  of  Arkansas  Medical  Science 
Hospital in Little Rock of bone marrow cancer. Soon after, Walton's 
oldest  son,  S.  Robeson  Walton,  who  succeeded  his  father  as  chair-
man  of  the  company,  gave  a  public  statement.  "No  changes  are  ex-
pected  in  the  corporate  direction,  control  or  policy,"  he  said.  Sadly 
for  Wal-Mart  employees,  customers  and  shareholders,  that  is  not 
what happened. 
Sam  Walton  was  the  embodiment  of  the  everyman.  Though  he 
was named the richest man in America by Forbes magazine in 1985, 
a  title  he  held  until  he  died,  he  never  understood the  importance 
others  placed  on  money.  Certainly,  Walton  was  a  competitor,  and 
money was a good yardstick of success. But that's not what gave 
Walton  or  those  who  worked  at  Wal-Mart  the  feeling of  success.  It 
was people Walton valued above all else. People. 
Look  after  people  and  people  will  look  after  you  was  his  belief, 
and  everything  Walton  and  Wal-Mart  did  proved  it.  In  the  early 
days, for example, Walton  insisted on  showing up for work on Sat-
urdays  out  of  fairness  to  his  store  employees  who  had  to  work 
weekends.  He  remembered  birthdays  and  anniversaries  and  even 
that  a  cashier's  mother  had just  undergone  gallbladder  surgery.  He 
chastised  his  executives  for  driving  expensive  cars  and  resisted 
using a corporate jet for many years. If the average American didn't 
have  those  things,  then  neither  should  those  who  are  supposed  to 
be their champions. 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
227 
Wal-Mart  never  went  through  a  split  under  Walton's command, 
because  Walton  never  forgot  where  he  came  from.  "I still  can't  be-
lieve  it  was  news  that  I  get  my  hair  cut  at  the  barbershop.  Where 
else  would  I  get  it  cut?"  he  said.  "Why  do  I  drive a  pickup  truck? 
What  am  I  supposed  to  haul  my  dogs  around  in,  a  Rolls-Royce?" 
Often  seen  wearing  his  signature  tweed  jacket  and  a  trucker's  cap, 
Walton   was   the   embodiment   of   those   he   aimed   to   serve—the 
average-Joe American. 
With  a  company  so  beloved  by  employees,  customers  and  com-
munities,  Walton  made  only  one  major  blunder.  He  didn't  put  his 
cause into clear enough words so that others could continue to lead 
the  cause  after  he  died.  It's  not  entirely  his  fault.  The  part  of  the 
brain  that  controls  the  WHY  doesn't  control  language.  So,  like  so 
many, the best Walton could articulate was HOW to bring his cause 
to life. He talked about making products cheap to make things more 
affordable   to   the   average   working   American.   He   talked   about 
building stores in rural communities so that the backbone of Amer-
ica's workforce didn't have to travel to the urban centers. It all made 
sense.  All  his  decisions  passed  the  Celery  Test.  It  was  the  WHY 
upon which the company was built, however, that was left unsaid. 
Walton  was  involved  in  the  company  until  just  before  his  death, 
when his ailing health prevented him from participating any longer. 
Like all organizations with founder-leaders whose physical presence 
helps   keep   the   WHY   alive,   his   continued   involvement   i|j   the 
company  had  reminded  everyone  WHY  they  came  to  work  every 
day.  He  inspired  everyone  around  him.  Just  as  Apple  ran  oij the 
fumes of Steve Jobs for a few years after he left the company before 
significant  cracks  started  to  show,  so  did  Wal-Mart  remember  Sam 
Walton and his WHY for a short time after he died. But as the WHY 
started  to  get  fuzzier  and  fuzzier,  the  company  changed  direction. 
From  then  on,  there  would  be  a  new  motivation  at  th<!  company, 

START WITH WHY 
228 
and   it   was   something   that   Walton   himself   cautioned against: 
chasing money. 
Costco  was  cofounded  in  1983  by  WHY-type  Jim  Sinegal  and 
HOW-type Jeffrey Brotman. Sinegal learned about discount retailing 
from  Sol  Price,  the  same  person  from  whom  Sam  Walton  admitted 
to "borrowing" much of what he knew about the business. And, like 
Walton,   Sinegal   believes   in   people   first.   "We're   going   to   be   a 
company  that's  on  a  first-name  basis  with  everyone,"  he  said  in  an 
interview  on  ABC's  newsmagazine  show 20/20.  Following  the  same 
formula  as  other  inspiring  leaders,  Costco  believes  in  looking  after 
its  employees  first.  Historically,  they  have  paid  their  people  about 
40 percent more than those who work at Sam's Club, the Wal-Mart-
owned   discount   warehouse.   And   Costco   offers   above-average 
benefits, including health coverage for more than 90 percent of their 
employees.  As  a  result,  their  turnover  is  consistently  five  times 
lower than Sam's Club. 
Like  all  companies  built  around  a  cause,  Costco  has  relied  on 
their  megaphone  to  help  them  grow.  They  don't  have a  PR  depart-
ment  and  they  don't  spend  money  on  advertising.  The  Law  of  Dif-
fusion  is  all  that  Costco  needed  to  get  the  word  out.  "Imagine  that 
you  have  120,000  loyal  ambassadors  out  there  who  are  constantly 
saying good things about you," quips Sinegal, recognizing the value 
of trust and loyalty of his employees over advertising and PR. 
For  years,  Wall  Street  analysts  criticized  Costco's  strategy  of 
spending  so  much  on  their  people  instead  of  on  cutting  costs  to 
boost margins and help share value. Wall Street would preferred the 
company  to  focus  on  WHAT  they  did  at  the  expense  of  WHY  they 
did  it.  A  Deutsche  Bank  analyst  told FORTUNE  magazine,  "Costco 
continues to be a company that is better at serving the club member 
and employee than the shareholder." 
Fortunately, Sinegal trusts his gut more than he trusts Wall Street 
analysts.  "Wall  Street  is  in  the  business  of  making  money  between 

SPLIT HAPPENS 
229 
now and next Tuesday," he said in the 20/20 interview. "We're in the 
business  of  building  an  organization,  an  institution  that  we  hope 
will  be  here  fifty  years  from  now.  And  paying  good wages  and 
keeping people working with you is very good business." 
The amazing insight in all of this is not just how inspiring Sinegal 
is, but that almost everything he says and does echoes Sam Walton. 
Wal-Mart got as big as it did doing the exact same thing— focusing 
on  WHY  and  ensuring  that  WHAT  they  did  proved  it.  Money  is 
never  a  cause,  it  is  always  a  result.  But  on  that  fateful  day  in  April 
1992, Wal-Mart stopped believing in their WHY. 
Since  Sam  Walton's  death,  Wal-Mart  has  been  battered  by  scan-
dals  of  mistreating  employees  and  customers  all  in the  name  of 
shareholder  value.  Their  WHY  has  gone  so  fuzzy  that  even  when 
they  do  things  well,  few  are  willing  to  give  them  credit.  The  com-
pany,  for  example,  was  among  the  first  major  corporations  to  de-
velop   an   environmental   policy   aimed   at   reducing   waste   and 
encouraging recycling. But Wal-Mart's critics have grown so skepti-
cal of the company's motives that the move was largely dismissed as 
posturing.  "Wal-Mart  has  been  working  to  improve  its  image  and 
lighten  its  environmental  impact  for  several  years now,"  a  column 
published on the New York Times Web site on October 28, 2008, read. 
"Wal-Mart  is  still  selling  consumerism  even  as  it  pledges  to  cut  the 
social  and  environmental  costs  of  making  the  stuff in  its  stores." 
Costco, on the  other  hand,  was later than  Wal-Mart to announce an 
environmental  policy,  yet  has  received  a  disproportionate  amount 
of attention. The difference is that people believe it when Costco does 
it. When people know WHY you do WHAT you do, they are willing 
to give you credit for everything that could serve as  proof of WHY. 
When  they  are  unclear  about  your  WHY,  WHAT  you  do  has  no 
context. Even though the things you do or decisions you make may 
be  good,  they  won't  make  sense  to  others  without  a clear  un-
derstanding of WHY. 

START WITH WHY 
230 
And  what  of  the  results?  Still  running  on  the  memory  of  Sam 
Walton, Wal-Mart's culture stayed intact at first, and the value of the 
two stocks was about even for a few years after Walton died. But as 
Wal-Mart  continued  to  run  its  business  in  a  post-Sam,  post-split 
manner  while  Costco  maintained  clarity  of  WHY,  the difference  in 
value changed dramatically. An investment in Wal-Mart on the day 
Sam  Walton  died  would  have  earned  a  shareholder  a  300  percent 
gain  by  the  time  this  book  was  written.  An  investment  made  in 
Costco on the same day would have netted an 800 percent gain. 
Costco's  advantage  is  that  the  embodiment  of  their WHY,  Jim 
Sinegal,  is  still  there.  The  things  he  says  and  does  help  reinforce  to 
all  those  around  him  what  the  company  stands  for.  Staying  true  to 
that   WHY,   Sinegal   draws   a   $430,000   salary,   a   relatively   small 
amount  given  the  size  and  success  of  the  company.  At  Wal-Mart's 
peak,  Sam  Walton  never  took  a  salary  of  more  than  $350,000  per 
year,  also  consistent  with  what  he  believed.  David Glass,  the  first 
man  to  take  over  as  CEO  after  Sam  Walton,  a  man  who  had  spent 
considerable time around Walton, said, "A lot of what goes on these 
days  with  high-flying  companies  and  these  overpaid CEOs,  who're 
really just looting from the top and aren't watching out for anybody 
but  themselves,  really  upsets  me.  It's  one  of  the  main  things  wrong 
with American business today." 
Three more CEOs have attempted to carry the torch that Walton 
lit. And with each succession that torch, that clear sense of purpose, 
cause and belief, has grown dimmer and dimmer. The new hope lies 
in  Michael  T.  Duke,  who  took  over  as  CEO  in  early  2009.  Duke's 
goal is to restore the luster and the clarity of Wal-Mart's WHY. 
And  to  do  it,  he  started  by  paying  himself  an  annual  salary  of 
$5.43 million. 
 

 
231 
PART 6 
DISCOVER WHY 
 

 
232 

 
233 
13 
 
THE ORIGINS OF A WHY 
It    started    in    Vietnam    War-era    Northern    California, where 
antigovernment  ideals  and  distain  for  large  centers  of  power  ran 
rampant.  Two  young  men  saw  the  power  of  government and 
corporations  as  the  enemy,  not  because  they  were  big,  per  se,  but 
because they squashed the spirit of the individual. They imagined a 
world  in  which  an  individual  had  a  voice.  They  imagined  a  time 
when   an   individual   could   successfully   stand   up   to   incumbent 
power,  old  assumptions  and  status-quo  thoughts  and successfully 
challenge  them.  Even  redirect  them.  They  hung  out  with  hippie 
types  who  shared  their  beliefs,  but  they  saw  a  different  way  to 
change  the  world  that  didn't  require  protesting  or engaging  in 
anything illegal. 
Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs came of age in this time. Not only 
was  the  revolutionary  spirit  running  high  in  Northern  California, 
but  it  was  also  the  time  and  place  of  the  computer revolution.  And 
in  this  technology  they  saw  the  opportunity  to  start  their  own  rev-
olution.  "The  Apple  gave  an  individual  the  power  to  do  the  same 
things as any company," Wozniak recounts. "For the first time ever, 
one person could take on a corporation simply because they had the 
ability to use the technology." Wozniak engineered the Apple I and 

START WITH WHY 
234 
later  the  Apple  II  to  be  simple  enough  for  people  to  harness  the 
power of the technology. Jobs knew how to sell it. Thus was born 
Apple   Computer.   A   company   with   a   purpose—to   give   the 
individual to power to stand up to established power. To empower 
the  dreamers  and  the  idealists  to  challenge  the  status  quo  and 
succeed. But their cause, their WHY, started long before Apple was 
born. 
In  1971,  working  out  of  Wozniak's  dorm  room  at  UC  Berkeley 
the two Steves made something they called the Blue Box. Their little 
device hacked the phone system to give people the ability to; avoid 
paying  long-distance  rates  on  their  phone  bills.  Apple  computers 
didn't  exist  yet,  but  Jobs  and  Woz  were  already  challenging  a  Big 
Brother-type  power,  in  this  case  Ma  Bell,  American Telephony  and 
Telegraph,  the  monopoly  phone  company.  Technically,  what  the 
Blue Box did was illegal, and with no desire to challenge power; by 
breaking  the  law,  Jobs  and  Woz  never  actually  used the  device 
themselves.  But  they  liked  the  idea  of  giving  other  individuals  the 
ability to avoid having to play by the rules of monopolistic forced a 
theme that would repeat many more times in Apple's future. ' 
On April 1, 1976, they repeated their pattern again. They took on 
the  giants  of  the  computer  industry,  most  notably  Big  Blue  IBM. 
Before the Apple, computing still meant using a punch card to give 
instructions  to  a  huge  mainframe  squirreled  away  in  a  computer 
center  somewhere.  IBM  targeted  their  technology  to corporations 
and  not,  as  Apple  intended,  as  a  tool  for  individuals  to  target, 
corporations.   With   clarity   of   purpose   and   amazing   discipline, 
Apple  Computer's  success  seemed  to  follow  the  Law  of Diffusion 
almost  by  design.  In  its  first  year  in  business,  the  company  sold  $1 
million   worth   of   computers   to   those   who   believed   what   they 
believed.  By  year  two,  they  had  sold  $10  million  worth.  By  their 
third  year  in  business  they  were  a  $100  million  company,  and  they 
attained billion-dollar status within only six years. 

THE ORIGINS OF A WHY 
235 
Already  a  household  name,  in  1984  Apple  launched  the  Macintosh 
with  their  famed  "1984"  commercial  that  aired  during  the  Super 
Bowl.  Directed  by  Ridley  Scott,  famed  director  of  cult  classics  like 
Blade  Runner,   the   commercial   also   changed   the   course   of   the 
advertising industry. The first "Super Bowl commercial," it ushered 
in   the   annual   tradition   of   big-budget,   cinematic   Super   Bowl 
advertising.  With  the  Macintosh,  Apple  once  again  changed  the 
tradition of how things were done. They challenged the standard of 
Microsoft's   DOS,  the  standard  operating  system   used  by  most 
personal  computers  at  the  time.  The  Macintosh  was  the  first  mass-
market  computer  to  use  a  graphical  user  interface  and  a  mouse, 
allowing  people  to  simply  "point  and  click"  rather than  input  code. 
Ironically,  it  was  Microsoft  that  took  Apple's  concept  to  the  masses 
with   Windows,  Gates's  version   of  the  graphical  user  interface. 
Apple's  ability  to  ignite  revolutions  and  Microsoft's  ability  to  take 
ideas  to  the  mass  market  perfectly  illustrate  the  WHY  of  each 
company  and  indeed  their  respective  founders.  Jobs has  always 
been  about  challenge  and  Gates  has  always  been  about  getting  to 
the most people. 
Apple  would  continue  to  challenge  with  other  products  that 
followed  the  same  pattern.  Recent  examples  include the  iPod  and, 
more  significantly,  iTunes.  With  these  technologies,  Apple  chal-
lenged  the  status-quo  business  model  of  the  music  industry—an 
industry so distracted trying to protect its  intellectual  property and 
their outdated business model that it was busy suing thirteen- year-
old  music  pirates  while  Apple  redefined  the  online music  market. 
The pattern repeated again when Apple introduced the iPhone. The 
status  quo  dictated  that  the  cellular  providers  and  not  the  phone 
manufacturer  decide  the  features  and  capabilities  of  the  actual 
phones.  T-Mobile,  Verizon  Wireless,  and  Sprint,  for  example,  tell 
Motorola,  LG,  and  Nokia  what  to  do.  Apple  changed  all  that  when 
they  announced  that,  with  the  iPhone,  they  would  be  telling  the 

START WITH WHY 
236 
provider  what  the  phone  would  do.  Ironically  the  company  that 
Apple  challenged  with  their  Blue  Box  decades  before,  this  time 
around  exhibited  classic  early-adopter  behavior.  AT&T  was  the 
only one to agree to this new model, and so another revolution was 
ignited. 
Apple's keen aptitude for innovation is born out of its WHY and, 
save  for  the  years  Jobs  was  missing,  it  has  never  changed  since  the 
company  was  founded.  Industries  holding  on  to  legacy  business 
models should be forewarned; you could be next. If Apple stays true 
to their WHY, the television and movie industries will likely be next. 
Apple's ability to do what they do has nothing to do with indus-
try  expertise.  All  computer  and  technology  companies  have  open 
access to talent and resources and are just as qualified to produce all 
the products Apple does. It has to do with a purpose, cause or belief 
that started many  years ago with a couple  of idealists in Cupertino, 
California. "I want to put a ding in the universe," as Steve Jobs put it. 
And  that's  exactly  what  Apple  does  in  the  industries  in  which  it 
competes.  Apple  is  born  out  of  its  founders'  WHY.  There  is  no 
difference between one or the other. Apple is just one of the WHATs 
to  Jobs's  and  Woz's  WHY.  The  personalities  of  Jobs and  Apple  are 
exactly  the  same.  In  fact,  the  personalities  of  all  those  who  are 
viscerally   drawn   to   Apple   are   similar.   There   is   no difference 
between  an  Apple  customer  and  an  Apple  employee.  One  believes 
in  Apple's  WHY  and  chooses  to  work  for  the  company,  and  the 
other believes in Apple's WHY and chooses to buy its products. It is 
just  a  behavioral  difference.  Loyal  shareholders  are  no  different 
either.  WHAT  they  buy  is  different,  but  the  reason they  buy  and 
remain  loyal  is  the  same.  The  products  of  the  company  become 
symbols of their own identities. The die-hards outside the company 
are  said  to  be  a  part  of  the  cult  of  Apple.  The  die-hards  inside  the 
company  are  said  to  be  a  part  of  the  "cult  of  Steve."  Their  symbols 
are  different,  but  their  devotion  to  the  cause  is  the  same.  That  we 

THE ORIGINS OF A WHY 
237 
use  the  word  "cult"  implies  that  we  can  recognize  that  there  is  a , 
deep  faith,  something  irrational,  that  all  those  who  believe  share* 
And  we'd  be  right.  Jobs,  his  company,  his  loyal  employees  and  his 
loyal  customers  all  exist  to  push  the  boundaries.  They  all  fancy  a 
good revolution. 
 
Just because Apple's WHY is so clear does not mean everyone is, 
drawn  to  it.  Some  people  like  them  and  some  don't. Some  people 
embrace  them  and  some  are  repelled  by  them.  But  it cannot  be 
denied:  they  stand  for  something.  The  Law  of  Diffusion  says  that 
only 2.5 percent of the population has an innovator mentality— they 
are a group of people willing to trust their intuition and take greater 
risks   than   others.   Perhaps   it   is   no   coincidence   that   Microsoft 
Windows  sits  on  96  percent  of  the  world's  computers  whereas 
Apple  maintains  about  2.5  percent.  Most  people  don't  want  to 
challenge the status quo. 
Though Apple employees will tell you the company's success lies 
in  its  products,  the  fact  is  that  a  lot  of  companies  make  quality 
products.  And  though  Apple's  employees  may  still  insist  that  their 
products  are  better,  it  depends  on  the  standard  by which  you  are 
judging them. Apple's products are indeed best for those who relate 
to  Apple's  WHY.  It  is  Apple's  belief  that  comes  through  in  all  they 
think,  say  and  do  that  makes  them  who  they  are.  They  are  so 
effective  at  it,  they  are  able  to  clearly  identify their  own  products 
simply  by  preceding  the  product  name  with  the  letter  "i."  But  they 
don't just own the letter, they own the word "I." They are a company 
that champions the creative spirit of  the  individual, and their prod-
ucts, services and marketing simply prove it. 
 
 

START WITH WHY 
238 
The WHY Comes from Looking Back 
Conservative  estimates  put  the  numbers  at  three  to one.  But  some 
historians  have  said  the  English  army  was  outnumbered  by  six  to 
one.  Regardless  of  which  estimates  you  choose  to  believe,  the  pros-
pects  for  Henry  V,  king  of  England,  did  not  look  good.  It  was  late 
October  in  the  year  1415  and  the  English  army  stood  ready  to  do 
battle  against  a  much  bigger  French  force  at  Agincourt  in  northern 
France. But the numbers were just one of Henry's problems. 
The  English  army  had  marched  over  250  miles,  taking  them 
nearly  three  weeks,  and  had  lost  nearly  40  percent of  their  original 
numbers to sickness. The French, in stark contrast, were better rested 
and in much better spirits. The better-trained and more experienced 
French were also excited at the prospect of exacting their revenge on 
the English to make up for the humiliation of previous defeats. And 
to top it all off, the French were vastly better equipped; The English 
were lightly armored, but whatever protection they did have was no 
match for the superior weight of the French armor, But anyone who 
knows their medieval European history already knows the outcome 
of  the  battle  of  Agincourt.  Despite  the  overwhelming  odds,  the 
English won. 
The  English  had  one  vital  piece  of  technology  that was  able  to 
confound  the  French  and  start  a  chain  of  events  that  would  ulti-
mately  result  in  a  French  defeat.  The  English  had  the  longbow,  a 
weapon  with  astounding  range  for  its  time.  Standing  far  from  the 
battlefield,  far  enough  away  that  heavy  armor  was  not  needed;  the 
English could look down into the valley and shower the French with 
arrows.  But  technology  and  range  aren't  what  give  an  arrow  its 
power. By itself, an arrow is a flimsy stick of wood with a sharpened 
tip and some feathers. By itself, an arrow cannot stand up to a sword 
or  penetrate  armor.  What  gives  an  arrow  the  ability  to  take  on 
experience, training, numbers and armor is momentum. That flimsy 
stick  of  wood,  when  hurtling  through  the  air,  becomes  a  force  only 

THE ORIGINS OF A WHY 
239 
when  it  is  moving  fast  in  one  direction.  But  what  does  the  battle  of 
Agincourt have to do with finding your WHY? 
Before  it  can  gain  any  power  or  achieve  any  impact,  an  arrow 
must  be  pulled  backward,  180  degrees  away  from  the target.  And 
that's also where a WHY derives its power. The WHY does not come 
from looking ahead at what you want to achieve and figuring out an 
appropriate  strategy  to  get  there.  It  is  not  born  out  of  any!  market 
research. It does not come from extensive interviews with customers 
or   even   employees.   It   comes   from   looking   in   the   completely 
opposite  direction  from  where  you  are  now.  Finding WHY  is  a 
process of discovery, not invention. 
Just  as  Apple's  WHY  developed  during  the  rebellious  1960s  and 
'70s,  the  WHY  for  every  other  individual  or  organization  comes 
from the past. It is born out of the upbringing and life experience of 
an  individual  or  small  group.  Every  single  person  has  a  WHY  and 
every single organization has one too. An organization, don't forget, 
is one of the WHATs, one of the tangible things a founder or group 
of founders has done in their lives to prove their WHY. 
Every company, organization or group with the ability to inspire 
starts with a person or small group of people who were inspired to 
do  something  bigger  than  themselves.  Gaining  clarity  of  WHY, 
ironically, is  not the hard part. It is the discipline to trust  one's gut, 
to stay true to one's purpose, cause or beliefs. Remaining completely 
in  balance  and  authentic  is  the  most  difficult  part.  The  few  that  are 
able  to  build  a  megaphone,  and  not  just  a  company, around  their 
cause are the ones  who earn the ability to inspire. In  doing so, they 
harness   a   power   to   move   people   that   few   can   even   imagine. 
Learning    the    WHY    of    a    company    or    an    organization    or 
understanding the WHY of any social movement always starts with 
one thing: you. 
 

START WITH WHY 
240 
I Am a Failure 
There   are   three   months   indelibly   printed   in   my   memory— 
September to December 2005. This was when I hit rock bottom. 
I  started  my  business  in  February  2002  and  it  was  incredibly 
exciting.  I  was  "full  of  piss  and  vinegar,"  as  my  grandfather  would 
say.  From  an  early  age,  my  goal  was  to  start  my  own  business.  It 
was  the  American  Dream,  and  I  was  living  it.  My  whole  feeling  of 
self- worth came from the fact that I did it, I took the plunge, and it 
felt amazing. If anyone ever asked me what I did, I would pose like 
George  Reeves  from  the  old Superman  TV  series.  I  would  put  my 
hands  on  my  hips,  stick  out  my  chest,  stand  at  an  angle  and  with 
my head raised high I'd declare, "I am an entrepreneur." What I did 
was how I defined myself, and it felt good. I wasn't like Superman, I 
was Superman. 
As anyone  who  starts a business knows, it  is a fantastic race. There 
is  a  statistic  that  hangs  over  your  head—over  90  percent  of  all  new 
businesses fail in the first three years. For anyone with even a bit of 
a  competitive  spirit  in  them,  especially  for  someone  who  defines 
himself  or  herself  as  an  entrepreneur  (hands  on  hips,  chest  out, 
standing  at  a  slight  angle),  these  overwhelming  odds  of  failure  are 
not  intimidating,  they  only  add  fuel  to  the  fire.  The  foolishness  of 
thinking  that  you're  a  part  of  the  small  minority  of  those  who 
actually  will  make  it  past  three  years  and  defy  the  odds  is  part  of 
what  makes  entrepreneurs  who  they  are,  driven  by  passion  and 
completely irrational. 
After  year  one,  we  celebrated.  We  hadn't  gone  out  of  business. 
We  were  beating  the  odds.  We  were  living  the  dream.  Two  years 
passed. Then three years. I'm still not sure how we did it—we never 
properly implemented any good systems and processes. But to heck 
with it, we'd beaten the  odds. I had achieved my goal and that's all 
that mattered. I was now a proud member of a very small group of 

THE ORIGINS OF A WHY 
241 
people who could say, with statistical proof, that I was an American 
small business owner. 
The fourth year would prove to be very different. The novelty of 
being  an  entrepreneur  had  worn  off.  I  no  longer  stood  like  George 
Reeves.  When  asked  what  I  did,  I  would  now  tell  people  that  I  did 
"positioning and strategy consulting." It was much less exciting and 
it  certainly  didn't  feel  like  a  big  race  anymore.  It  was  no  longer  a 
passionate  pursuit,  it  was  just  a  business.  And  the  reality  was  that 
the business did not look that rosy. 
We  were  never  a  runaway  success.  We  made  a  living, but  not 
much  more.  We  had  some  FORTUNE  500  clients  and  we  did  good 
work. I was crystal clear on what we did. And I could tell you how 
we were different—how we did it. Like everyone else in the game, I 
would  try  to  convince  prospective  clients  how  we  did  it,  how  we 
were better, how our way was unique ... and it was hard work. The 
truth is, we beat the odds because of my energy, not because of my 
business  acumen,  but  I  didn't  have  the  energy  to  sustain  that 
strategy for the rest of my life. I was aware enough to know that we 
needed  better  systems  and  processes  if  the  business  was  to  sustain 
itself. 
I was incredibly demoralized. Intellectually, I could tell you what 
I  needed  to  do,  I  just  couldn't  do  it.  By  September  2005  I  was  the 
closest  I've  ever  been  to,  if  I  wasn't  already,  completely  depressed. 
My  whole  life  I'd  been  a  pretty  happy-go-lucky  guy,  so  just  being 
unhappy was bad enough. But this was worse. 
The depression made me paranoid. I was convinced I was going 
to  go  out  of  business.  I  was  convinced  I  was  going to  be  evicted 
from my apartment. I was certain anyone who worked for me didn't 
like me and that my clients knew I was a fraud. I thought everyone I 
met was smarter than me. I thought everyone I met was better than 
me.  Any  energy  I  had  left  to  sustain  the  business  now  went  into 
propping myself up and pretending that I was doing well. 

START WITH WHY 
242 
If  things  were  to  change,  I  knew  I  needed  to  learn to  implement 
more  structure  before  everything  crashed.  I  attended  conferences, 
read books and asked successful friends for advice on how to do it. 
It  was  all  good  advice,  but  I  couldn't  hear  it.  No matter  what  I  was 
told, all I could hear was that I was doing everything wrong. Trying 
to fix the problem didn't make me feel better, it made me feel worse. 
I  felt  more  helpless.  I  started  having  desperate  thoughts,  thoughts 
that  for  an  entrepreneur  are  almost  worse  than  suicide:  I  thought 
about getting a job. Anything. Anything that would stop the feeling 
of falling I had almost every day. 
I  remember  visiting  the  family  of  my  future  brother-in-law  for 
Thanksgiving  that  year.  I  sat  on  the  couch  in  the  living  room  of  his 
mother's  house,  people  were  talking  to  me,  but  I  never  heard  a 
word.  If  I  was  asked  questions,  I  replied  only  in  platitudes.  I  didn't 
really desire or even have the ability to make conversation anymore. 
It was then that I realized the truth. Statistics notwithstanding, I was 
a failure. 
As  an  anthropology  major  in  college  and  a  strategy guy  in  the 
marketing  and  advertising  world,  I  had  always  been curious  about 
why  people  do  the  things  they  do.  Earlier  in  my  career  I  started 
becoming  curious  about  these  same  themes  in  the  real  world—in 
my case, corporate marketing. There is an old saying in the industry 
that  50  percent  of  all  marketing  works,  the  problem  is,  which  50 
percent?  I  was  always  astounded  that  so  many  companies  would 
operate  with  such  a  level  of  uncertainty.  Why  would  anyone  want 
to leave the  success  of something that costs so much,  with  so  much 
at stake to the flip of a coin? I was convinced that if some marketing 
worked, it was possible to figure out why. 
All  companies  of  equal  resources  have  equal  access to  the  same 
agencies,  the  same  talent,  and  the  same  media,  so  why  does  some 
marketing  work  and  some  doesn't?  Working  in  an  ad  agency  I'd 
seen it all the time. With conditions relatively equal,  the same team 

THE ORIGINS OF A WHY 
243 
could  develop  a  campaign  that  would  be  hugely  successful  one 
year, then develop  something the  next year that would do nothing. 
Instead of focusing on the stuff that didn't work, I chose to focus on 
the  stuff  that  worked  to  find  out  what  it  all  had  in  common.  The 
good news for me was there was not much to study. 
How  has  Apple  been  able  to  so  consistently  outmarket  their 
competition over and over and over? What did Harley-Davidson do 
so  well  that  they  were  able  to  create  a  following  of  people  so  loyal 
that  they  would  tattoo  a  corporate  logo  on  their  bodies?  Why  did 
people  love  Southwest  Airlines  so  much—they  aren't really  that 
special...  are  they?  In  an  attempt  to  codify  why  these  worked,  I 
developed a simple concept I called The Golden Circle. But my little 
theory  sat  buried  in  my  computer  files.  It  was  a  little  pet  project 
With no real application, just something I found interesting. 
It  would  be  months  later  that  I  met  a  woman  at  an  event  who 
took  an  interest  in  my  perspectives  in  marketing.  Victoria  Duffy 
Hopper  grew  up  in  an  academic  family  and  also  has  a  lifelong 
fascination with  human behavior. She  was the first to tell me about 
the limbic brain and the neocortex. My curiosity piqued by what she 
was telling me, I started reading about the biology of the brain, and 
it was then that I made the real discovery. 
The  biology  of  human  behavior  and  The  Golden  Circle  overlapped 
perfectly.  While  I  was  trying  to  understand  why  some  marketing 
worked and some didn't, I had tripped over something vastly more 
profound.  I  discovered  why  people  do  what  they  do. It  was  then 
that  I  realized  what  was  the  real  cause  of  my  stress.  The  problem 
wasn't  that  I  didn't  know  what  to  do  or  how  to  do  it,  the  problem 
was I had forgotten WHY. I had gone through what I now know is a 
split, and I needed to rediscover my WHY. 
 

START WITH WHY 
244 
To Inspire People to Do the Things That Inspire Them 
Henry  Ford  said,  "If  you  think  you  can  or  you  think  you  can't, 
you're  right."  He  was  a  brilliant  WHY-guy  who  changed  the  way 
industry  works.  A  man  who  embodied  all  the  characteristics  of  a 
great  leader,  who  understood   the   importance   of   perspective.  I 
wasn't any dumber than I was when I started my business, probably 
the opposite, in fact. What I had lost was perspective. I knew what I 
was doing, but I had forgotten WHY. There is a difference between 
running with all your heart with your eyes closed and running with 
your  all  your  heart  with  your  eyes  wide  open.  For  three  years,  my 
heart had pounded but my eyes had been closed. I had passion and 
energy, but I lacked focus and direction. I needed to remember what 
inspired my passion. 
I became obsessed with the concept of WHY. I was consumed by 
the  idea  of  it.  It  was  all  I  talked  about.  When  I  looked  back  to  my 
upbringing,   I   discovered   a   remarkable   theme.   Whether   among 
friends,  at  school  or  professionally,  I  was  always the  eternal  opti-
mist. I was the one who inspired everyone to believe they could do 
whatever they wanted. This pattern is my WHY. To inspire. It didn't 
matter  if  I  was  doing  it  in  marketing  or  consulting.  It  didn't  matter 
what  types  of  companies  I  worked  with  or  in  which  industries  I 
worked.  To  inspire  people  to  do  the  things  that  inspired  them,  so 
that,  together,  we  can  change  the  world.  That's  the  path  to  which 
my  life  and  my  work  is  now  completely  devoted.  Henry  Ford 
would have been proud of me. After months of thinking I couldn't, 
now I knew I could. 
I  made  myself  a  guinea  pig  for  the  concept.  If  the reason  I  hit 
rock bottom was because my Golden Circle was out of balance, then 
I  needed  to  get  it  back  in  balance.  If  it  was  important  to  start  with 
WHY, then I would start with WHY in everything I did. There is not 
a  single  concept  in  this  book  that  I  don't  practice.  I  stand  at  the 
mouth of my  megaphone and I talk about the WHY to anyone who 

THE ORIGINS OF A WHY 
245 
will listen. Those early adopters who hear my cause see me as a tool 
in their arsenal to achieve their own WHY. And they introduced me 
to  others  whom  they  believed  I  could  inspire.  And  so  the  Law  of 
Diffusion started to do its job. 
Though The Golden Circle and the concept of WHY was working 
for me, I wanted to show it to others. I had a decision to make: do I 
try  to  patent  it,  protect  it  and  use  it  to  make  lots  of  money,  or  do  I 
give it away? This decision was to be my first Celery Test. My WHY 
is to inspire people to do the things that inspire them, and if I am to 
be  authentic  to  that  cause  there  was  only  one  decision  to  make—to 
give  it  away,  to  talk  about  it,  to  share  it.  There would  never  be  any 
secret   sauce   or   special   formula   for   which   only   I   knew   the 
ingredients.  The  vision  is  to  have  every  person  and  every  orga-
nization know their WHY  and use it to benefit all they do. So that's 
what I'm doing, and I'm relying entirely on the concept of WHY and 
the naturally occurring pattern that is The Golden Circle to help me 
get there. 
The  experiment  started  to  work.  Prior  to  starting  with  WHY,  I 
had  been  invited  to  give  one  public  speech  in  my  life.  Now  I  get 
between thirty and forty invitations per year, from all sorts of audi-
ences, all over the world, to speak about The Golden Circle. I speak 
to  audiences  of  entrepreneurs,  large  corporations, nonprofits,  in 
politics and government. I've spoken at the Pentagon  to the chief of 
staff and the secretary of the Air Force. Prior to The Golden Circle, I 
didn't  even  know  anyone  in  the  military.  Prior  to  starting  with 
WHY,  I  had  never  been  on  television;  in  fewer  than two  years  I 
started getting regular invitations to appear on MSNBC. I've worked 
with  members  of  Congress,  having  never  done  any  government  or 
political work prior to starting with WHY. 
I  am  the  same  person.  I  know  the  same  things  I  did before.  The 
only difference is, now I start with WHY. Like Gordon Bethune who 
turned  around  Continental  with  the  same  people  and the  same 

START WITH WHY 
246 
equipment,  I  was  able  to  turn  things  around  with  the  things  I  al-
ready knew and did. 
I'm not better connected than everyone else. I don't have a better 
work  ethic.  I  don't  have  an  Ivy  League  education  and  my  grades  in 
college were average. The funniest part  is, I still don't  know  how to 
build a business. The only thing that I do that most people don't is I 
learned how to start with WHY. 
 
 

 
247 
14 
 
THE NEW COMPETITION 
If You Follow Your WHY, Then Others Will Follow You 
"BANG!"  The  gun  fires  and  the  race  is  on.  The  runners  take  off 
across  the  field.  It  rained  the  day  before  and  the ground  is  still 
damp.  The  temperature  is  cool.  It  is  a  perfect  day for  running.  The, 
line of runners quickly forms a pack. Like a school of fish they come 
together   as   one.   They   move   as   one.   The   pack   sets   a pace   to 
maximize  their  energy  for  the  whole  race.  As  with  any  race,  in  a  
short  period  of  time  the  stronger  ones  will  start  to  pull  ahead  and 
the  weaker  ones  will  start  to  fall  behind.  But  not Ben  Comen.  Ben 
was  left  behind  as  soon  as  the  starter  gun  sounded.  Ben's  not  the 
fastest  runner  on  the  team.  In  fact,  he's  the  slowest.  He  has  never 
won  a  single  race  the  entire  time  he's  been  on  the Hanna  High 
School cross-country track team. Ben, you see, has cerebral palsy. 
Cerebral  palsy,  a  condition  often  caused  by  complications  at. 
birth,  affects  someone's  movement  and  balance.  The physical  prob-
lems  endure  for  a  lifetime.  Misshapen  spines  create  a  twisted  pos-
ture. Muscles are often withered and motor reflexes slow. Tightness 
in  the  muscles  and  joints  also  affect  balance.  Those  with  CP  often 

START WITH WHY 
248 
have  an  unsteady  gait,  their  knees  knock  and  their feet  drag.  To  an 
outsider, they may seem clumsy. Or even broken. 
The  pack  pulls  farther  and  farther  ahead  while  Ben falls  farther 
and farther behind. He slips on the wet grass and falls forward into 
the  soft  earth.  He  slowly  picks  himself  up  and  keeps  going.  Down 
he  goes  again.  This  time  it  hurts.  He  gets  back  up and  keeps  run-
ning.  Ben  won't  quit.  The  pack  is  now  out  of  sight and  Ben  is 
running  alone.  It  is  quiet.  He  can  hear  his  own  labored  breathing. 
He feels lonely. He trips over his own feet again, and down he goes 
yet  another  time.  No  matter  his  mental  strength,  there  is  no  hiding 
the  pain  and  frustration  on  his  face.  He  grimaces  as  he  uses  all  his 
energy to pull himself back to his feet to continue running. For Ben, 
this  is  part  of  the  routine.  Everyone  else  finishes  the  race  in  about 
twenty-five  minutes.  It  usually  takes  Ben  more  than  forty-  five 
minutes. 
When  Ben  eventually  crosses  the  finish  line  he  is  in  pain  and  he 
is exhausted. It took every ounce of strength he had to make it. His 
body  is  bruised  and  bloodied.  He  is  covered  in  mud.  Ben  inspires 
us, indeed. But this is not a story of "when the going gets tough, the 
tough  get  going."  This  is  not  a  story  of  "when  you fall  down,  pick 
yourself  up."  Those  are  great  lessons  to  learn,  without  a  doubt,  but 
we  don't  need  Ben  Comen  to  teach  us  those  lessons. There  are 
dozens of others we can look to for that, like an Olympic athlete, for 
example, who suffered an injury just months before the games only 
to come back to win a medal. Ben's lesson is deeper. 
Something  amazing  happens  after  about  twenty-five  minutes. 
When  everybody  else  is  done  with  their  race,  everyone  comes  back 
to run with Ben. Ben is the only runner who, when he falls, someone 
else  will  help  pick  him  up.  Ben  is  the  only  runner who,  when  he 
finishes, has a hundred people running behind him. 
What Ben teaches us is special. When you compete against everyone 
else,  no  one  wants  to  help  you.  But  when  you  compete  against 

THE NEW COMPETITION 
249 
yourself,  everyone  wants  to  help  you.  Olympic  athletes  don't  help 
each  other.  They're  competitors.  Ben  starts  every  race  with  a  very 
clear  sense  of  WHY  he's  running.  He's  not  there  to beat  anyone  but 
himself.  Ben  never  loses  sight  of  that.  His  sense  of  WHY  he's 
running  gives  him  the  strength  to  keep  going.  To  keep  pushing.  To 
keep  getting  up.  To  keep  going.  And  to  do  it  again and  again  and 
again.  And  every  day  he  runs,  the  only  time  Ben  sets  out  to  beat  is 
his own. 
Now  think  about  how  we  do  business.  We're  always  competing 
against someone else. We're always trying to be better than someone 
else.  Better  quality.  More  features.  Better  service.  We're  always 
comparing  ourselves  to  others.  And  no  one  wants  to help  us.  What 
if  we  showed  up  to  work  every  day  simply  to  be  better  than  our-
selves?  What  if  the  goal  was  to  do  better  work  this  week  than  we 
did  the  week  before?  To  make  this  month  better  than  last  month? 
For no other reason than because we want to leave the organization 
in a better state than we found it? 
All  organizations  start  with  WHY,  but  only  the  great  ones  keep 
their  WHY  clear  year  after  year.  Those  who  forget  WHY  they  were 
founded  show  up  to  the  race  every  day  to  outdo  someone  else  in-
stead  of  to  outdo  themselves.  The  pursuit,  for  those  who  lose  sight 
of WHY they are running the race, is for the medal or to beat some-
one else. 
What  if  the  next  time  when  someone  asks,  "Who's  your  com-
petition?"  we  replied,  "No  idea."  What  if  the  next time  someone 
pushes,  "Well,  what  makes  you  better  than  your  competition?"  we 
replied,  "We're  not  better  than  them  in  all  cases."  And  what  if  the 
next  time  someone  asks,  "Well  why  should  I  do  business  with  you 
then?"  we  answer  with  confidence,  "Because  the  work  we're  doing 
now is better than the work we were doing six months ago. And the 
work  we'll  be  doing  six  months  from  now  will  be  better  than  the 
work  we're  doing  today.  Because  we  wake  up  every  day  with  a 

START WITH WHY 
250 
sense of WHY we come to work. We come to work to inspire people 
to   do   the   things   that   inspire   them.   Are   we   better   than   our 
competition?  If  you  believe  what  we  believe  and  you  believe  that 
the things we do can help you, then we're better. If you don't believe 
what  we  believe  and  you  don't  believe  the  things  we  can  do  will 
help  you,  then  we're  not  better.  Our  goal  is  to  find  customers  who 
believe  what  we  believe  and  work  together  so  that  we  can  all 
succeed.  We're  looking  for  people  to  stand  shoulder-to-shoulder 
with  us  in  pursuit  of  the  same  goal.  We're  not  interested  in  sitting 
across a table from each other in pursuit of a sweeter deal. And here 
are  the  things  we're  doing  to  advance  our  cause  ..."  And  then  the 
details  of  HOW  and  WHAT  you  do  follow.  But  this  time,  it  started 
with WHY. 
Imagine   if   every   organization   started   with   WHY.   Decisions 
would  be  simpler.  Loyalties  would  be  greater.  Trust  would  be  a 
common  currency.  If  our  leaders  were  diligent  about  starting  with 
WHY,  optimism  would  reign  and  innovation  would  thrive.  As  this 
book illustrates, there is precedence for this standard. No matter the 
size  of  the  organization,  no  matter  the  industry,  no  matter  the 
product or the service, if we all take some responsibility to start with 
WHY  and  inspire  others  to  do  the  same,  then,  together,  we  can 
change the world. 
And that's pretty inspiring. 
.   .     
If  this  book  inspired  you,  please  pass  it  on  to  someone  you  want  to 
inspire.

 
251 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
There  is  nothing  that  brings  me  more  joy  and  happiness  in  this 
world  than  waking  up  every  day  with  a  clear  sense  of  WHY—to 
inspire people to do the things that inspire them. It is a simple thing 
to do when surrounded by so many amazing people to inspire me. 
There  are  countless  people  who  believed  in  me  and  helped  me 
over  the  years.  I'd  like  to  thank  those  who  helped me  build  a  piece 
of  my  megaphone  with  this  book.  Amy  Hertz  was  the  first  to  insist 
that  I  write  it  and  introduced  me  to  my  incredible agent,  Richard 
Pine.  Richard  believes  in  doing  good  things  in  the world  and  has 
made  it  his  business  to  make  authors  out  of  those  who  have  a  pos-
itive  message  to  share.  His  patience  and  counsel  have  been  invalu-
able. To Russ Edelman who was such a nice guy to introduce me to 
his editor, Jeffrey Krames, who, in turn, took a bet on me and let me 
push   him   to   do   things   differently.   To   Adrian   Zackheim,   who 
willingly  challenges  convention  and  is  leading  the evolution  of  the 
publishing industry. 
Thank  you  to  Mark  Rubin,  who  sees  the  colors  I  can see  and  in 
whose  basement  I  started  writing,  to  Tom  and  Alicia  Rypma,  in 
whose home I continued writing, and to Delta Airlines, for being so 
good  to  me  while  I  wrote  so  much  at  35,000  feet.  To  Julia  Hurley, 
who  made  sure  everything  was  right.  To  the  whole  team  at  Portfo-
lio,  who  worked  so  hard  to  bring  this  book  to  life.  And,  most  im-

Acknowledgments 
 
252 
portantly, to Laurie Flynn, who so passionately devoted herself (and 
her family) to help me tell this story. 
I  have  had  the  great  honor  and  privilege  of  meeting  some 
wonderful  people  who  have  inspired  me  in  a  way  that  is  hard  to 
quantify.  Ron  Bruder  has  changed  the  way  I  see  the world.  Brig. 
Gen.  Lori  Robinson  has  shown  me  what  the  humility  of  great  lead-
ership looks like. Kim Harrison, who lives her WHY—to appreciate 
all  good  things  around  her—and  works  tirelessly  to see  to  it  that 
good  ideas  and  people  are  appreciated.  She  taught  me  what  a  true 
partnership  looks  and  feels  like.  And  to  those  whose  shared  what 
they  know  to  help  bring  the  WHY  to  life,  I  am  truly  grateful  for 
your   time   and   energy:   Colleen   Barrett,   Gordon   Bethune,   Ben 
Comen,   Randy   Fowler,   Christina   Harbridge,   Dwayne   Honor6, 
Howard  Jeruchimowitz,  Guy  Kawasaki,  Howard  Putnam, James 
Tobin,  Acacia  Salatti,  Jeff  Sumpter,  Col.  "Cruiser"  Wilsbach  and 
Steve Wozniak. 
Long before there was even an idea of a book, there were all the 
people and early adopters who wanted to learn about the WHY and 
use   The   Golden   Circle   to   help   build   their   organizations.   This 
forward-thinking  group  were  willing  to  embrace  a  new  idea  and 
were  essential  to  helping  me  figure  out  many  of  the  details  and 
nuances  of  the  concept.  Thank  you  to  Geoffrey  Dzikowski,  Jenn 
Podmore,   Paul   Guy,   Kal   Shah,   Victor   DeOliveria,   Ben   Rosner, 
Christopher Bates, Victor Chan, Ken Tabachnick, Richard Baltimore, 
Rick  Zimmerman,  Russ  Natoce,  Missy  Shorey,  Morris  Stemp,  Gabe 
Solomon, Eddie Esses and Elizabeth Hare, who saw the value of the 
WHY in building the most valuable organization of all— her family. 
Thank  you  to  Fran  Biderman-Gross,  who  is  not  only  an  early 
adopter,  but  who  went  out  of  her  way  to  embrace  her  WHY  in  all 
aspects  of  her  life  and  to  encourage  others  to  learn  their  WHY,  too. 
Thank    you    to    Congresswoman    Stephanie    Herseth    Sandlin, 
Congressman  Paul  Hodes,  and  Congresswoman  Allyson  Schwartz, 

Acknowledgments 
253 
who gave me so much and continue to give back to others with such 
passion. 
Over the years there were those who gave me a break and helped 
advance  my  cause.  Thank  you  to  Trudi  Baldwin,  the  director  of  the 
Graduate   Program   in   Strategic   Communications   at   Columbia 
University (a wonderful program), Jim Berrien, who trusted me, the 
indefatigable   Jack   Daly,   who   teaches   me,   Piers   Fawkes,   Denis 
Glennon,   who   pushed   me,   Kevin   Goetz,   Tony   Gomes,   Paul 
Gumbinner, who gave me a career on a silver platter, Kenneth Hein, 
Peter Intermaggio, who taught me self-reliance, Pamela Moffat, Rick 
Sapio, who keeps doing good things for me, Alana Winter and Matt 
Weiss,  for  asking  me  to  share  my  thoughts  with  an  audience,  and 
Diederik Werdmolder who took a bet on me right at the start. 
I am grateful to all the brilliant minds I have met within the U.S. 
Air Force who stuck their necks out to try something different. They 
embody  the  WHY  of  the  USAF:  to  find  and  deliver  better  ways  of 
doing things. To Maj. Gen. Erwin Lessel (who first introduced me to 
the  organization),  Maj.  Gen.  William  Chambers,  Brig.  Gen.  Walter 
Givhan, Brig. Gen. Dash Jamieson (who never stops believing), Maj. 
Gen. Darren McDew, Brig. Gen. (Sel) Martin Neubauer (who knows 
more   than   I   will   ever   know),   Christy   Nolta,   Brig.   Gen.   Janet 
Therianos and Lt. Col. Dede Halfhill (you owe me one, DeDe). 
I  am  immensely  grateful  to  all  the  brilliant  people  and  candid 
conversations  that  inspired  so  many  of  the  ideas  that  became  The 
Golden  Circle  and  all  its  parts.  Thank  you  to  Kendra  Coppey,  who 
helped  me  out  of  the  hole  in  late  2005  and  to  Mark Levy,  who 
pointed  me  in  the  right  direction.  Thanks  to  Peter Whybrow,  who 
saw  a  problem  in  America  and  helped  me  to  understand  the 
neuroscience  of  it  all.  Kirt  Gunn,  whose  brilliant storytelling  mind 
inspired    the    split.    Every    conversation    with    Brian    Collins 
illuminated  something  new.  Thank  you  to  Jorelle  Laakso,  who 
taught me to reach for the things I believe in. To William Ury, who 

Acknowledgments 
 
254 
showed  me  a  path  to  follow,  and  Lt.  Gen.  David  Deptula,  who  is 
probably   the   smartest   person   I   know   and   gave   me   a   new 
perspective for solving highly complex problems. 
My  understanding  of  the  WHY  would  be  incomplete  without 
the   conversations,   help   and   support   of   Nic   Askew,   Richard 
Baltimore,    Christopher    Bennett,    Christine    Betts,    Ariane    de 
Bonvoisin,  Scott  Bornstein,  Tony  Conza,  Vimal  Duggal,  Douglas 
Fiersetin,  Nathan  Frankel,  JiNan  Glasgow,  Cameron  Herold,  John 
Hittler,   Maurice   Kaspy,   Peter   Laughter,   Kevin   Langley,   Niki 
Lemon, Seth Lloyd, Bruce Lowe, Cory Luker, Karl and Agi Mallory, 
Peter   Martins,   Brad   Melt-   zer,   Nell   Merlino,   Ally   Miller,   Jeff 
Morgan,  Alan  Remer,  Pamela  and  Nick  Roditi,  Ellen  Rohr,  Lance 
Piatt, Jeff Rothstein, Brian Scudamore, Andy Siegel, John Stepleton, 
Rudy  Vidal,  the  2007  and  2008  classes  of  the  Gathering  of  Titans, 
and the one and only Ball of Mystery. 
To  my  late  grandfather,  Imre  Klaber,  who  showed  me that  it  is 
more  fun  to  be  slightly  eccentric  than  to  be  completely  normal.  To 
my  parents,  Steve  and  Susan  Sinek,  who  always  encouraged  me  to 
follow  the  beat  of  my  own  drum.  And  to  Sara,  my  remarkable, 
remarkable  sister,  who  appreciates  that  I  keep  my  head  in  the 
clouds but makes sure I keep my feet on the ground. 
There  are  a  few  books  and  authors  that  have,  over  the  years, 
inspired  me,  spurred  ideas  and  offered  me  new  perspectives:  the 
works  of  Ken  Blanchard,  of  Tom  Friedman  and  of  Seth  Godin, The 
Starfish  and  the  Spider  by  Ori  Brafman  and  Rod  Beckstrom, First, 
Break  All  the  Rules  by  Marcus  Buckingham,  Good  to  Great  by  Jim 
Collins, The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen Covey, The 
4-Hour Workweek  by  Tim  Ferriss, Never Eat Alone  by  Keith  Ferrazzi, 
E-Myth   by   Michael   Gerber,  The  Tipping  Point   and Outliers   by 
Malcolm  Gladwell, Chaos  by  James  Gleick, Emotional Intelligence  by 
Daniel Goleman, Made to Stick by Chip and Dan Heath, Who Moved 
My Cheese?  by  Spencer  Johnson,  M.D., The Monk and the Riddle  by 

Acknowledgments 
255 
Randy Komisar, The Five Dysfunctions of a Team by Patrick Lencioni, 
Freakanomics  by  Steven  D.  Levitt  and  Stephen  J.  Dubner, FISH!  By 
Stephen  Lundin,  Harry  Paul, John  Christensen  and  Ken  Blanchard, 
The Naked Brain  by  Richard  Restack, Authentic Happiness  by  Martin 
Seligman,  The  Wisdom  of  Crowds  by  James  Surowiecki,  The  Black 
Swan  by  Nicholas  Taleb, American Mania  by  Peter  Whybrow,  M.D., 
and the single most important book everyone should read, the book 
that teaches us that we cannot control the circumstances around us, 
all we can control is our attitude—Man's Search for Meaningbj Viktor 
Frankel. 
I  want  to  especially  thank  all  those  people  who  have  joined  this 
cause  and  actively  work  to  inspire  those  around  you.  I  am  grateful 
for  all  the  e-mails  and  notes  you  send  me,  I  save  them  all  as  a  re-
minder  that  it  takes  lots  and  lots  of  people,  standing  shoulder  to 
shoulder, to have a real impact. 
And  finally,  to  all  those  who  read  this  book  and  pass  it  on  to 
someone  you  believe  it  will  inspire,  thank  you.  I  know  that  if 
enough  of  us  learn  about  the  existence  of  the  WHY  and  work  hard 
to  start  everything  we  do  with  WHY,  we  can  and  will  change  the 
world.

 
256 

 
257 
NOTES 
Chapter 1: Assume You Know 
14  In the United States, a line worker would take a rubber mallet and tap the edges of the 
door.  Norman  Bodek,  "What  is  Muda?"  Manufacturing  Engineering,  July  2006, 
http://www.sme.org/cgi-bin/find-articles.pl?&ME06ART40&ME&2006 
0709&SME. 
Chapter 2: Carrots and Sticks 
19  By 2007, Toyota's share had climbed to 16.3 percent: Tom Krisher, "GM, Toyota in 
virtual  tie  on  2007  sales," USA Today,  January  23,2008,  http://www.usatoday 
.com/money/topstories/2008-01 -23-434472425_x.htm. 
19 In 2007, GM lost $729per vehicle: Oliver Wyman's Harbour Report 2008, http:// 
www.oliverwyman.com/content_images/OW_EN_Automotive_Press_2008_ 
HarbourReport08.pdf. 
20 nearly 40 percent of those customers never get the lower price:  Brian  Grow,  "The 
Great  Rebate  Runaround,"  BusinessWeek,  November  23,  2005,  http://www 
.businessweek.eom/bwdaily/dnflash/nov2005/nf20051123_4158_db016.htm. 
22    "Quitting smoking is the easiest thing I've ever done":  American  Cancer  Society 
Guide  to  Quitting  Smoking,  http://www.cancer.org/docroot/PED/content/ 
PED_10_13X_Guide_for_Quitting_Smoking.asp. 
24    a Tag Heuer watch designed "especially for the golfer":  
http://www.tagheuer.com/ the-collection/specialists/golf-watch/index.lbl. 
24 Nike's "I wanna be like Mike" campaign:  "The  Allure  of  Gatorade," CNN Money, 
November 22,2000, http://money.cnn.com/2000/ll/21/deals/gatorade/. 
25 "In  a  major  innovation  in  design  and  engineering":  "Introducing  the  Motorola 
RAZR 
V3,
,
'http://www.motorola.com/mediacenter/news/detail.jsp?globalObj 
ectld=4485_3818_23. 
26 Less than four years later, Zander was forced out  "Motorola's  Zander  out  after  4 
rocky  years,"  MSNBC,  November  30,  2007,  http://www.msnbc.msn.com/ 
id/22040026/. 
27 Colgate offers a link on their Web site:   
28 http://www.colgate.com/app/Colgate/US/ 
OC/Products/Toothpastes/Name.cvsp. 
29    Samsung, the electronics giant  "Samsung's  American  Unit  Settles  Rebate  Case,"

 
258 
New York Times, October 21, 2004, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpagifc 
.html?res=9B01E3DD113AF932A15753ClA9629C8B63. 
33    Rather, Whybrow says, it's the way that corporate America has developed:  Peter  C. 
Whybrow, American Mania: When More Is Not Enough. New York: W. W. Norton 
& Company, 2005. 
Chapter 3: The Golden Circle 
37 the golden ratio—a simple mathematical relationship: Wolfram Mathworld, "Golden 
Ratio," http://mathworld.wolfram.com/GoldenRatio.html. Also 
http://goldennumber.net/. 
38 John F. Kennedy's challenge to put a man on the moon:  "The  Decision  to  Go  the 
Moon:  President  John  F. Kennedy's  May  25,1961  Speech  before  a  Joint  Session 
of Congress," NASA History Office, http://history.nasa.gov/moondec.html. 
44    "1,000 songs in your pocket"Apple  Presents  iPod,"  http://www.apple.com/pr/ 
library/2001/ oct/23ipod.html. 
44    The multigigabyte portable hard drive music player was actually invented by Creative 
Technology Ltd.: "The Nomad Jukebox Holds a Hefty Store of Music," New York 
Times,    June    1,    2000,    http://www.nytimes.com/2000/06/01/technology/ 
news-watch-the-nomad-jukebox-holds-a-hefty-store-of-music.html?scp= 1 
&sq=creative+nomad&st=nyt. 
46  Apple  even  changed  its  legal  name  in  2007:  "Apple  Debuts  iPhone,  TV  Device, 
Drops  'Computer'  From  Name,"  Foxnews.com,  January  11,  2007,  http://www 
.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,242483,OO.html. 
Chapter 4: This Is Not Opinion, This Is Biology 
52    Now,  the  Star-Belly  Sneetches:  Dr.  Seuss,  The  Sneetches  and  Other  Stories.  New 
York: Random House, 1961. 
54    U2  and  Apple  belong  together:  "Apple  Introduces  the  U2  iPod,"  http://www 
.apple.com/pr/library/2004/oct/26u2ipod.html. 
54  "J'm a Mac and I'm a PC": "Get a Mac," http://www.apple.com/getamac/ads/. 
57    Richard Restak, a well-known neuroscientist. Richard Restak, MD, The Naked Brain: 
How the Emerging Neurosociety Is Changing How We Live, Work and Love.  New 
York: Harmony, 2006. 
Chapter 5: Clarity, Discipline and Consistency 
70    to take what Pacific Southwest was doing in California: "PSA: Catch Our Smile; The 
Story of Pacific Southwest Airlines," http://catchoursmile.com/. 
70 In  nearly  every  way,  King  and  Kelleher  were  opposites:  Matt  Malone,  "In  for  a 
Landing," Portfolio.com, August 2008, http://www.portfolio.com/executives/ 
features/2008/07/16/Q-and-A-with-Southwest  CEO-Kelleher;  Joseph  Guinto, 
"Rollin   On,"  Southwest  Airlines  Spirit,   June   2006,   http://macy.ba.ttu.edu/ 
FaU%2006/SWA%20Rollin%200n.pdf;  Katrina  Brooker,  "The  Chairman  of  the 
Board  Looks  Back,"  FORTUNE,  May  28,  2001,  http://money.cnn.com/maga 
zines/fortune/fortune_archive/2001/05/28/303852/index.htm;   "We   Weren't 

Index 
 
259 
Just Airborne Yesterday," 
http://www.southwest.com/about_swa/airborne.html. 
71 In the early 1970s, only 15 percent of the traveling population traveled by air. Brian 
Lusk,  Southwest  Airlines  manager  of  customer  communications,  personal 
correspondence, February 2009. 
72    Howard  Putnam,  one  of  the  former  presidents  of  Southwest.  Howard  Putnam, 
personal interview, October 2008. 
Chapter 6: The Emergence of Trust 
83    Throughout the 1980s, this was life at Continental Airlines: Gordon Bethune, From 
Worst to First: Behind the Scenes of Continental's Remarkable Comeback. New York: 
John Wiley and Sons, 1999. 
83    Happy  employees  ensure  happy  customers:  Kevin  Freiberg  and  Jackie  Freiberg, 
Nuts!  Southwest  Airlines'  Crazy  Recipe  for  Business  and  Personal  Success.  New 
York: Broadway, 1998. 
85    "You don't lie to your own doctor": Gordon Bethune, personal interview, January 
2009. 
91    The cost... would be about $250,000:  "Shackleton  Plans  Record  Polar  Trip," New 
York Times, December 30,1913. 
91    Donations  from  English  schoolchildren  paid  for  the  dog  teams:  "Ernest  H.  Shack-
leton, 1874-1922" South-Pole.com, www.south-pole.com/p0000097.htm. 
91    Just a few days out of South Georgia Island:  http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/ 
shackleton/1914/timeline.html. 
91 "like  an almond  in  a  piece of  toffee":  Paul  Ward,  "Shackleton,  Sir  Ernest  (1874-
1922)," Cool Antarctica, http://www.coolantarctica.com/Antarctica%20 
fact%20file/History/Ernest%20Shackleton_Trans-Antarctic_expedition2 .htm. 
92 "Men wanted for Hazardous journey Nova Online, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/ 
nova/shackleton/1914/team.html. 
94    In the 1970s, Southwest Airlines decided to put their flight attendants in hot pants: 
Howard Putnam, personal interview, October 2008. 
96 Langley assembled some of the best and brightest minds of the day.  James  Tobin, To 
Conquer the Air: The Wright Brothers and the Great Race for Flight. New York: Free 
Press, 2004. 
97 Langley  saw  the  airplane  as  his  ticket  to  fame  and fortune:   Tobin,   personal 
interview, February 2009. 
97 "Wilbur  and  Orville  were  true  scientists":  Tobin,  personal  interview,  February 
2009. 
98 He found the defeat humiliating: Tobin, To Conquer the Air. 
101    Southwest  Airlines  is  famous  for  pioneering  the  ten-minute  turnaround: Paul 
Burnham  Finney,  "Loading  an  Airliner  is  Rocket  Science,"  New  York  Times, 
November 14, 2006, http://travel2.nytimes.com/2006/ll/14/business/ 
14boarding.html?pagewanted=print. 
103     "People at the London end of Barings":  Nick  Leeson  and  Edward  Whitley. Rogue 
Trader: How I Brought Down Barings Bank and Shook the Financial World. New 
York: Little, Brown and Company, 1996. 

Index 
 
260 
105 Southwest will not tolerate customers who abuse their staff.  Freiberg  and  Freiberg, 
Nuts! 
106 A  one-star  general,  John  Jumper  was  an  experienced  F-15  pilot:  General  Lori 
Robinson, personal interview, October 2008. 
108    he  served  as  chief  of  staff  of  the  U.S.  Air  Force  from  2001  to  2005:  http://www 
.af.mil/bios/bio.asp?bioID=5986. 
108    Now  herself  a  brigadier  general  in  the  Air  Force:  http://www.af.mil/bios/bio 
.asp?bioID= 10439. 
Chapter 7: How a Tipping Point Tips 
115 In 2000, Malcolm Gladwell created his own tipping point  Malcolm  Gladwell,, The 
Tipping Point: How Little Things Can Make a Big Difference. New York; Back Bay 
Books, 2002. 
116 Everett M. Rogers was the first to formally describe how innovations spread through 
society. Everett M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press, 2003. 
116 Geoffrey Moore expanded on Rogers's ideas to apply the principle to high-tech product 
marketing: Geoffrey A. Moore, Crossing the Chasm. New York: Collins, 2002. 
122   In 1997, TiVo was racing to market with a remarkable new device:  John  Markoff, 
"Netscape Pioneer to Invest in Smart VCR,"New York Times, November^, 1998, 
http://query.nytimes.com/   gst/fullpage.html?res=9F0DE0D6133EF93AA35752 
C1A96E958260. 
123  TiVo finally shipped in 1999: 
http://www.tivo.com/abouttivo/aboutushome/index.html. 
123   TiVo sold about 48,000 units the first year. Roy Furchgott, "Don't People Want to 
Control  Their  TV's?"  New  York  Times,  August  24,2000,  http://www.nytimes 
.com/2000/08/24/technology/don-t-people-want-to-control-their-tv-s.html. 
123   "More U.S. Homes Have Outhouses than TiVos": Bradley Johnson, "Analysts Mull 
Future Potential of PVR Ad-Zapping Technology," Advertising Age, November 
4,2002, http://people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~hal/Courses/StratTech09/ 
Lectures/Networks/Articles/tivo-losing-money.html. 
128   "There are two types of laws": Martin Luther King Jr., "Letter from a Birmingham 
Jail," http://www.thekingcenter.org/prog/non/Letter.pdf. 
Chapter 8: Start with Why, but Know How 
133 Steve Ballmer, the man who replaced Bill Gates as CEO of Microsoft: "Steve Ballmer 
Going    Crazy,"    March    31,2006,    http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wvs 
boPUjrGc. 
134 the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation:  
135 http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Pages/ home.aspx. 
136 Raised in Ohio, sixty miles from Dayton, Neil Armstrong grew up:  Nick  Greene, 
"Neil Armstrong Biography: First Man of the Moon," About.com, http://space 
.about.com/od/astronautbiographies/a/neilarmstrong.htm. 
138  What Ralph Abernathy lent the movement was something else:  "Abernathy,  Ralph 
David  (1926-1990),"  Martin  Luther  King,  Jr.,  Research and  Education  Institute, 
http://mlk-kpp01.stanford.edu/index.php/kingpapers/article/abernathy_ 
ralph_david_1926_1990/. 

Index 
 
261 
140   The pessimists are usually right Thomas Friedman, The World Is Flat: A Brief 
History of the 21st Century. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2005. 
140   "If it hadn't been for my big brother":  Bob  Thomas, Building a Company: Roy O. 
Disney and the Creation of an Entertainment Empire. New York: Disney Editions, 
1998. 
142   Herb Kelleher was able to personify and preach the cause of freedom: Kevin Freiberg 
and  Jackie  Freiberg,  Nuts!  Southwest  Airlines'  Crazy  Recipe  for  Business  and 
Personal Success. New York: Broadway, 1998. 
142 Steve Wozniak is the engineer who made the Apple work:  Steve  Wozniak,  personal 
interview, November 2008. 
143 Bill Gates and Paul Allen went to high school together in Seattle: Randy Alfred, 
"April 4,1975: Bill Gates, Paul Allen Form a Little Partnership," Wired, April 4, 
1975,http://www.wiredxorn/science/discoveries/news/2008/04/dayintech_
0404. 
145   Oprah Winfrey once gave away a free car. Ann Oldenburg, "7M car giveaway stuns 
TV   audience,"  USA  Today,   September   13,   2004,   http://www.usatoday 
.com/life/people/2004-09-13-oprah-cars_x.htm. 
150  the  Education  for  Employment  Foundation:    http://www.efefoundation.org/ 
homepage.html;  Lisa  Takeuchi  Cullen,  "Gainful  Employment,"  Time,  Septem-
ber  20,2007,  http://www.time.eom/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1663851,00 
.html; Ron Bruder, personal interview, February 2009. 
Chapter 10: Communication Is Not About Speaking, It's About Listening 
 
160    "I Have  a Dream" speech:  "I  Have  a  Dream—Address  at  March  on  Washington, 
August  28,1963.  Washington,  D.C.,"  MLK  Online,  http://www.mlkonline.net/ 
dream.html. 
160 American flag on a soldier's right arm?:  Brendan  I.  Koerner,  "Soldiers  and  Their 
Backward Flags," Slate, March 18,2003, http://www.slate.com/id/2080338/. 
161 "Don't  let  anyone  tell  you  that  America's  best  days are  behind  her":  President 
Ronald  Reagan's  Address  Before  a  Joint  Session  of  the  Congress  Reporting  on 
the  State  of  the  Union,  January  26,  1982,  http://www.c-span.org/executive/ 
transcript.asp?cat=current_event&code=bush_admin&year=1982. 
163    "Mostly; it says I'm an American":  Randy  Fowler,  general  manager  of  a  Harley- 
Davidson dealership in California, personal interview, January 2009. 
165    In  2003  and  2004  Apple  ran  a  promotion  for  iTunes  with  Pepsi:  http://www 
.apple208m/pr/library/2003/oct/16pepsi.html. 
170    Volkswagen  introduced  a $70,000 luxury  model  to  their  lineup:  "2006  Volkswagen 
Phaeton   Review,"   Edmonds.com.,   http://www.edmunds.com/volkswagen/ 
phaeton/2006/review.html;  "VW  analyses  Phaeton  failure,  reveals  new  details 
about  next-gen  model,"  MotorAuthority.com,  February  18,2008,  http://www 
.motorauthority.com/vw-analyses-phaeton-failure-reveals-new-details-about- 
next-gen-model.html. 

Index 
 
262 
Chapter 11: When Why Goes Fuzzy 
175 "A lot of what goes on these days with high-flying companiesSam Walton and John 
Huey, Sam Walton: Made in America; My Story. New York: Bantam, 1992. 
176 There are 27.7 million registered businesses in the United States today.  U.S.  Small 
Business Administration, Office of Advocacy, 
http://www.sba.gov/advo/stats/ sbfaq.pdf. 
176 Sam Walton didn't even invent a better way of doing things than everyone else: Bob 
Ortega, In Sam We Trust: The Untold Story of Sam Walton and How Wal- Mart Is 
Devouring the World. New York: Kogan Page, 1999. 
177 For Sam Walton, there was something else: Walton and Huey, Sam Walton. 
177  "We're  all  working  together;  that's  the  secret":   http://walmartstores.com/ 
CommunityGiving/8508.aspx. 
177  The  company  once  renowned  for  how  it  treated  employees  and  customers  has  been 
scandal-ridden for nearly a decade:  "Wal-Mart  Wage  and  Hour  Settlement," Wal- 
Mart Watch, http://action.walmartwatch.cOm/page/-/Wal-
Mart%20Wage%20 and%20Hour%20Settlement.pdf. 
178  "Celebrate your successes":  Gene  N.  Landrum, Entrepreneurial Geniu. The Power of 
Passion. New York: Brendan Kelly Publishing Inc., 2004. 
178 Wal-Mart  still  sells  more  than  six  times  as  much  as  Target  each  year,  http  // 
walmartstores.com/FactsNews/NewsRoom/8224.aspx; http://investors, 
target .com/phoenix.zhtml?c=65828&p=irol-homeProfile. 
179 Every year a group of high-performing entrepreneurs get together at MIT's Ench cott 
House: http://www.gatheringoftitans.com/. 
Chapter 12: Split Happens 
189 In the fall of her freshman year in college, Christina Harbridge set out to find a part-time 
job:   Christina   Harbridge,   personal   interview,   November 2008;   http:// 
christinaharbridge.com/blog/. 
191  Dwayne  Honore  has  for  the  past  ten  years  run  his  own  commercial  construction 
company.  Dwayne  Honore,  personal  interview,  December  2008; http://www 
.dhonore.com/explore.cfm/ourcompany/owner/. 
193 Though Gates abdicated his role as CEO: "Gates exits Microsoft to focus on charity 
work,"    MSNBC    News    Services,    June    27,2008,    http://www.msnbc.msn 
.com/id/25408326/. 
194 "A  PC  in  every  home  and  on  every  desk":  http://www.microsoft.com/aboUt/ 
companyinformation/ourbusinesses/profile.mspx. 
195 after  a  legendary  power  struggle  with  Apple's  president,  John  Sculley:  Andrew 
Pollack,  "Apple Computer  Entrepreneurs  Rise  and  Fall," New York Times,  Sep-
tember 19, 1985, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=950DE7DA 
1739F93AA2575AC0A963948260&scp=3&sq=apple%201985%20jobs%20 
resigns&st=cse. 
195 Sculley  was  a  perfectly  capable  executive  with  a  proven  track  record:  "Marketing 
Genius  for  Pepsi  and  Apple:  John  Sculley  III,  WG'63," Wharton Alumni Maga-
zine,   Spring   2007,   http://www.wharton.upenn.edu/alum_mag/issues/125 
anniversaryissue/sculley.html. 

Index 
 
263 
196 "Do  you  want  to  sell  sugar  water  your  whole  life  or  do  you  want  to  change  the 
world?": Triumph of the Nerds: The Television Program Transcripts: Part III, PBS, 
http://www.pbs.org/nerds/part3.html. 
196 New products would be "less revolutionary and more evolutionary":  Brian  O'Reilly, 
"Apple   Computer's   Risky   Revolution,"  FORTUNE,   May   8,1989,   http:// 
money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/1989/05/08/71954/ind
ex .htm. 
197 From the start, he focused on efficiency: Steve Lohr, "Can Michael Dell Refocus His 
Namesake?"  New  York  Times,   September   9,   2007,   http://www.nytimes. 
com/2007/09/09/technology/09dell.html. 
198 If you look back at the history of Starbucks: http://www.starbucks.com/ aboutus/ 
Company_Timeline.pdf. 
199 In a now famous memo that Schultz wrote:  "Text  of  Starbucks  Memo," Wall Street 
Journal,     February     24,     2007,     http://online.wsj.com/public/article/     SB 
117234084129218452-hpbDoP_cLbOUdcG_Oy7qLlQ70kg_20080224 
.html?mod=rss_free. 
199  In  early2008,  Schultz  replaced  Donald:  Burt  Helm  and  Jena  McGregor,  "Howard 
Schultz's   Grande   Challenge,"  BusinessWeek,   January   9,   2008,   http://www 
.businessweek.com/magazine/content/08_03/b4067000369003 
.htm?chan=top+news_top+news+index_businessweek+exclusives. 
201  Putnam  recounts  the  time  he  met  with  Kelleher  to  interview  for  the  job:  Howard 
Putnam, personal interview, October 2008. 
201 The  same  could  he  said  for  Colleen Barrett,  who  became president  of  Southwest  in 
2001: Colleen Barrett, personal interview, December 2008. 
202 Walton's oldest son
y
 S. Robeson Walton:  http://findarticles.c0m/p/articles/mi_ 
m3092/is_n8_v3 l/ai_l2098902/. 
203 Walton insisted on showing up for work on Saturdays: Sam Walton and John Huey, 
Sam Walton: Made in America; My Story. New York: Bantam, 1992. 
203 "I still can't believe it was news that I get my hair cut at the barbershop": Ibid. 
204 Sinegal  learned  about  discount  retailing  from  Sol  Price:  Matthew  Boyle,  "Why 
Costco  is  so  addictive," FORTUNE,  October  25,2006,  http://money.cnn.com/ 
magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2006/10/30/8391725/index.htm. 
204 Sinegal believes in people first: Alan B. Goldberg and Bill Ritter, "Costco CEO Finds 
Pro-Worker   Means   Profitability,"   ABC   News,   August   2,   2006,   http:// 
abcnews.go.com/2020/business/story?id= 1362779. 
204 Wall Street analysts criticized Costco's strategy of spending so much on their people: 
John Helyar, "The Only Company Wal-Mart Fears," FORTUNE, November 24, 
2003, 
http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2003/11/24/ 
353755/index.htm. 
205 "Wal-Mart  has  been  working  to  improve  its  image  and lighten  its  environmental 
impact  for  several  years  now":  Andrew  C.  Revkin,  "Wal-Mart's  New  Sustain- 
ability  Push,"  nytimes.com,  October  23,  2008,  http://dotearth.blogs.nytimes 
.com/tag/wal-mart/. 
206 "A lot of what goes on these days with high-flying companies":  Walton  and  Huey, 
Sam Walton. 
206  And  to  do  it,  he  started  by  paying  himself  an  annual  salary  of  $5.43  million: 
http://finance.yahoo.com/q/pr?s=WMT. 

Index 
 
264 
Chapter 13: The Origins of a WHY 
209 "The Apple gave an individual the power to do the same things as any company": 
Steve Wozniak, personal interview, November 2008. 
210 the two Steves made something they called the Blue Box: Nick Cantlay, "Biography: 
Stephen    Wozniak,"    The    Apple    Museum,    http://www.theapplemuseum 
.com/index.php?id=50. 
210  famed  "1984"  commercial  that  aired  during  the  Super  Bowl:   http://www 
.youtube.com/watch?v=OYecfV 3ubP8. 
Chapter 14: The New Competition 
222  But  not  Ben  Comen:  Rick  Reilly,  "Worth  the  Wait,"  Sports  Illustrated,  http:// 
sportsillustrated.cnn.com/2003/pr/subs/siexclusive/rick_reilly/10/13/ 
reilly1020/index.html _the_wait.htm. 
 
 
 